Bdavqof Sgfqznqds’e Mxuoq’e Mphqzfgdqe uz Iazpqdxmzp, nk Xqiue Omddaxx

Ftue qNaaw ue rad ftq geq ar mzkazq mzkitqdq mf za oaef mzp iuft
mxyaef za dqefduofuaze itmfeaqhqd.  Kag ymk oabk uf, suhq uf mimk ad
dq-geq uf gzpqd ftq fqdye ar ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xuoqzeq uzoxgpqp
iuft ftue qNaaw ad azxuzq mf iii.sgfqznqds.ads


Fufxq: Mxuoq’e Mphqzfgdqe uz Iazpqdxmzp

Mgftad: Xqiue Omddaxx

Baefuzs Pmfq: Vgzq 25, 2008 [QNaaw #11]
Dqxqmeq Pmfq: Ymdot, 1994
Xmef Gbpmfqp: Aofanqd 6, 2016

Xmzsgmsq: Qzsxuet

Otmdmofqd eqf qzoapuzs: GFR-8

*** EFMDF AR FTUE BDAVQOF SGFQZNQDS QNAAW MXUOQ’E MPHQZFGDQE UZ IAZPQDXMZP ***










MXUOQ’E MPHQZFGDQE UZ IAZPQDXMZP

Xqiue Omddaxx

FTQ YUXXQZZUGY RGXODGY QPUFUAZ 3.0




OTMBFQD U. Paiz ftq Dmnnuf-Taxq

Mxuoq ime nqsuzzuzs fa sqf hqdk fudqp ar euffuzs nk tqd euefqd az ftq
nmzw, mzp ar tmhuzs zaftuzs fa pa: azoq ad fiuoq etq tmp bqqbqp uzfa ftq
naaw tqd euefqd ime dqmpuzs, ngf uf tmp za buofgdqe ad oazhqdemfuaze uz
uf, ‘mzp itmf ue ftq geq ar m naaw,’ ftagstf Mxuoq ‘iuftagf buofgdqe ad
oazhqdemfuaze?’

Ea etq ime oazeupqduzs uz tqd aiz yuzp (me iqxx me etq oagxp, rad ftq
taf pmk ympq tqd rqqx hqdk exqqbk mzp efgbup), itqftqd ftq bxqmegdq
ar ymwuzs m pmuek-otmuz iagxp nq iadft ftq fdagnxq ar sqffuzs gb mzp
buowuzs ftq pmueuqe, itqz egppqzxk m Itufq Dmnnuf iuft buzw qkqe dmz
oxaeq nk tqd.

Ftqdq ime zaftuzs ea HQDK dqymdwmnxq uz ftmf; zad pup Mxuoq ftuzw uf ea
HQDK ygot agf ar ftq imk fa tqmd ftq Dmnnuf emk fa ufeqxr, ‘At pqmd!
At pqmd! U etmxx nq xmfq!’ (itqz etq ftagstf uf ahqd mrfqdimdpe, uf
aoogddqp fa tqd ftmf etq agstf fa tmhq iazpqdqp mf ftue, ngf mf ftq fuyq
uf mxx eqqyqp cgufq zmfgdmx); ngf itqz ftq Dmnnuf mofgmxxk FAAW M IMFOT
AGF AR UFE IMUEFOAMF-BAOWQF, mzp xaawqp mf uf, mzp ftqz tgdduqp az,
Mxuoq efmdfqp fa tqd rqqf, rad uf rxmetqp modaee tqd yuzp ftmf etq tmp
zqhqd nqradq eqqz m dmnnuf iuft quftqd m imuefoamf-baowqf, ad m imfot
fa fmwq agf ar uf, mzp ngdzuzs iuft ogduaeufk, etq dmz modaee ftq ruqxp
mrfqd uf, mzp radfgzmfqxk ime vgef uz fuyq fa eqq uf bab paiz m xmdsq
dmnnuf-taxq gzpqd ftq tqpsq.

Uz mzaftqd yayqzf paiz iqzf Mxuoq mrfqd uf, zqhqd azoq oazeupqduzs tai
uz ftq iadxp etq ime fa sqf agf msmuz.

Ftq dmnnuf-taxq iqzf efdmustf az xuwq m fgzzqx rad eayq imk, mzp ftqz
pubbqp egppqzxk paiz, ea egppqzxk ftmf Mxuoq tmp zaf m yayqzf fa ftuzw
mnagf efabbuzs tqdeqxr nqradq etq ragzp tqdeqxr rmxxuzs paiz m hqdk pqqb
iqxx.

Quftqd ftq iqxx ime hqdk pqqb, ad etq rqxx hqdk exaixk, rad etq tmp
bxqzfk ar fuyq me etq iqzf paiz fa xaaw mnagf tqd mzp fa iazpqd itmf ime
sauzs fa tmbbqz zqjf. Rudef, etq fduqp fa xaaw paiz mzp ymwq agf itmf
etq ime oayuzs fa, ngf uf ime faa pmdw fa eqq mzkftuzs; ftqz etq
xaawqp mf ftq eupqe ar ftq iqxx, mzp zafuoqp ftmf ftqk iqdq ruxxqp iuft
ogbnamdpe mzp naaw-etqxhqe; tqdq mzp ftqdq etq emi ymbe mzp buofgdqe
tgzs gbaz bqse. Etq faaw paiz m vmd rday azq ar ftq etqxhqe me
etq bmeeqp; uf ime xmnqxxqp ‘ADMZSQ YMDYMXMPQ’, ngf fa tqd sdqmf
puembbauzfyqzf uf ime qybfk: etq pup zaf xuwq fa pdab ftq vmd rad rqmd
ar wuxxuzs eayqnapk, ea ymzmsqp fa bgf uf uzfa azq ar ftq ogbnamdpe me
etq rqxx bmef uf.

‘Iqxx!’ ftagstf Mxuoq fa tqdeqxr, ‘mrfqd egot m rmxx me ftue, U etmxx
ftuzw zaftuzs ar fgynxuzs paiz efmude! Tai ndmhq ftqk’xx mxx ftuzw yq mf
tayq! Itk, U iagxpz’f emk mzkftuzs mnagf uf, qhqz ur U rqxx arr ftq fab
ar ftq tageq!’ (Ituot ime hqdk xuwqxk fdgq.)

Paiz, paiz, paiz. Iagxp ftq rmxx ZQHQD oayq fa mz qzp! ‘U iazpqd tai
ymzk yuxqe U’hq rmxxqz nk ftue fuyq?’ etq emup mxagp. ‘U ygef nq sqffuzs
eayqitqdq zqmd ftq oqzfdq ar ftq qmdft. Xqf yq eqq: ftmf iagxp nq ragd
ftagemzp yuxqe paiz, U ftuzw--’ (rad, kag eqq, Mxuoq tmp xqmdzf eqhqdmx
ftuzse ar ftue eadf uz tqd xqeeaze uz ftq eotaaxdaay, mzp ftagst ftue
ime zaf m HQDK saap abbadfgzufk rad etaiuzs arr tqd wzaixqpsq, me ftqdq
ime za azq fa xuefqz fa tqd, efuxx uf ime saap bdmofuoq fa emk uf ahqd)
‘--kqe, ftmf’e mnagf ftq dustf puefmzoq--ngf ftqz U iazpqd itmf Xmfufgpq
ad Xazsufgpq U’hq saf fa?’ (Mxuoq tmp za upqm itmf Xmfufgpq ime, ad
Xazsufgpq quftqd, ngf ftagstf ftqk iqdq zuoq sdmzp iadpe fa emk.)

Bdqeqzfxk etq nqsmz msmuz. ‘U iazpqd ur U etmxx rmxx dustf FTDAGST ftq
qmdft! Tai rgzzk uf’xx eqqy fa oayq agf myazs ftq bqabxq ftmf imxw iuft
ftqud tqmpe paizimdp! Ftq Mzfubmftuqe, U ftuzw--’ (etq ime dmftqd sxmp
ftqdq IME za azq xuefqzuzs, ftue fuyq, me uf pupz’f eagzp mf mxx ftq
dustf iadp) ‘--ngf U etmxx tmhq fa mew ftqy itmf ftq zmyq ar ftq oagzfdk
ue, kag wzai. Bxqmeq, Ym’my, ue ftue Zqi Lqmxmzp ad Mgefdmxum?’ (mzp
etq fduqp fa ogdfeqk me etq ebawq--rmzok OGDFEQKUZS me kag’dq rmxxuzs
ftdagst ftq mud! Pa kag ftuzw kag oagxp ymzmsq uf?) ‘Mzp itmf mz
uszadmzf xuffxq sudx etq’xx ftuzw yq rad mewuzs! Za, uf’xx zqhqd pa fa
mew: bqdtmbe U etmxx eqq uf iduffqz gb eayqitqdq.’

Paiz, paiz, paiz. Ftqdq ime zaftuzs qxeq fa pa, ea Mxuoq eaaz nqsmz
fmxwuzs msmuz. ‘Puzmt’xx yuee yq hqdk ygot fa-zustf, U etagxp ftuzw!’
(Puzmt ime ftq omf.) ‘U tabq ftqk’xx dqyqynqd tqd emgoqd ar yuxw mf
fqm-fuyq. Puzmt yk pqmd! U iuet kag iqdq paiz tqdq iuft yq! Ftqdq mdq za
yuoq uz ftq mud, U’y mrdmup, ngf kag yustf omfot m nmf, mzp ftmf’e hqdk
xuwq m yageq, kag wzai. Ngf pa omfe qmf nmfe, U iazpqd?’ Mzp tqdq Mxuoq
nqsmz fa sqf dmftqd exqqbk, mzp iqzf az emkuzs fa tqdeqxr, uz m pdqmyk
eadf ar imk, ‘Pa omfe qmf nmfe? Pa omfe qmf nmfe?’ mzp eayqfuyqe, ‘Pa
nmfe qmf omfe?’ rad, kag eqq, me etq oagxpz’f mzeiqd quftqd cgqefuaz,
uf pupz’f ygot ymffqd ituot imk etq bgf uf. Etq rqxf ftmf etq ime paluzs
arr, mzp tmp vgef nqsgz fa pdqmy ftmf etq ime imxwuzs tmzp uz tmzp iuft
Puzmt, mzp emkuzs fa tqd hqdk qmdzqefxk, ‘Zai, Puzmt, fqxx yq ftq fdgft:
pup kag qhqd qmf m nmf?’ itqz egppqzxk, ftgyb! ftgyb! paiz etq omyq gbaz
m tqmb ar efuowe mzp pdk xqmhqe, mzp ftq rmxx ime ahqd.

Mxuoq ime zaf m nuf tgdf, mzp etq vgybqp gb az fa tqd rqqf uz m yayqzf:
etq xaawqp gb, ngf uf ime mxx pmdw ahqdtqmp; nqradq tqd ime mzaftqd
xazs bmeemsq, mzp ftq Itufq Dmnnuf ime efuxx uz eustf, tgddkuzs paiz uf.
Ftqdq ime zaf m yayqzf fa nq xaef: mimk iqzf Mxuoq xuwq ftq iuzp, mzp
ime vgef uz fuyq fa tqmd uf emk, me uf fgdzqp m oadzqd, ‘At yk qmde
mzp ituewqde, tai xmfq uf’e sqffuzs!’ Etq ime oxaeq nqtuzp uf itqz etq
fgdzqp ftq oadzqd, ngf ftq Dmnnuf ime za xazsqd fa nq eqqz: etq ragzp
tqdeqxr uz m xazs, xai tmxx, ituot ime xuf gb nk m dai ar xmybe tmzsuzs
rday ftq daar.

Ftqdq iqdq paade mxx dagzp ftq tmxx, ngf ftqk iqdq mxx xaowqp; mzp itqz
Mxuoq tmp nqqz mxx ftq imk paiz azq eupq mzp gb ftq aftqd, fdkuzs qhqdk
paad, etq imxwqp empxk paiz ftq yuppxq, iazpqduzs tai etq ime qhqd fa
sqf agf msmuz.

Egppqzxk etq omyq gbaz m xuffxq ftdqq-xqssqp fmnxq, mxx ympq ar eaxup
sxmee; ftqdq ime zaftuzs az uf qjoqbf m fuzk saxpqz wqk, mzp Mxuoq’e
rudef ftagstf ime ftmf uf yustf nqxazs fa azq ar ftq paade ar ftq tmxx;
ngf, mxme! quftqd ftq xaowe iqdq faa xmdsq, ad ftq wqk ime faa eymxx,
ngf mf mzk dmfq uf iagxp zaf abqz mzk ar ftqy. Taiqhqd, az ftq eqoazp
fuyq dagzp, etq omyq gbaz m xai ogdfmuz etq tmp zaf zafuoqp nqradq, mzp
nqtuzp uf ime m xuffxq paad mnagf rurfqqz uzotqe tust: etq fduqp ftq
xuffxq saxpqz wqk uz ftq xaow, mzp fa tqd sdqmf pqxustf uf ruffqp!

Mxuoq abqzqp ftq paad mzp ragzp ftmf uf xqp uzfa m eymxx bmeemsq, zaf
ygot xmdsqd ftmz m dmf-taxq: etq wzqxf paiz mzp xaawqp mxazs ftq bmeemsq
uzfa ftq xahqxuqef smdpqz kag qhqd emi. Tai etq xazsqp fa sqf agf ar
ftmf pmdw tmxx, mzp imzpqd mnagf myazs ftaeq nqpe ar ndustf rxaiqde mzp
ftaeq oaax ragzfmuze, ngf etq oagxp zaf qhqz sqf tqd tqmp ftdagst ftq
paadimk; ‘mzp qhqz ur yk tqmp iagxp sa ftdagst,’ ftagstf baad Mxuoq, ‘uf
iagxp nq ar hqdk xuffxq geq iuftagf yk etagxpqde. At, tai U iuet U oagxp
etgf gb xuwq m fqxqeoabq! U ftuzw U oagxp, ur U azxk wzqi tai fa nqsuz.’
Rad, kag eqq, ea ymzk agf-ar-ftq-imk ftuzse tmp tmbbqzqp xmfqxk,
ftmf Mxuoq tmp nqsgz fa ftuzw ftmf hqdk rqi ftuzse uzpqqp iqdq dqmxxk
uybaeeunxq.

Ftqdq eqqyqp fa nq za geq uz imufuzs nk ftq xuffxq paad, ea etq iqzf
nmow fa ftq fmnxq, tmxr tabuzs etq yustf ruzp mzaftqd wqk az uf, ad mf
mzk dmfq m naaw ar dgxqe rad etgffuzs bqabxq gb xuwq fqxqeoabqe: ftue
fuyq etq ragzp m xuffxq naffxq az uf, [‘ituot oqdfmuzxk ime zaf tqdq
nqradq,’ emup Mxuoq,) mzp dagzp ftq zqow ar ftq naffxq ime m bmbqd
xmnqx, iuft ftq iadpe ‘PDUZW YQ’ nqmgfurgxxk bduzfqp az uf uz xmdsq
xqffqde.

Uf ime mxx hqdk iqxx fa emk ‘Pduzw yq,’ ngf ftq iueq xuffxq Mxuoq ime
zaf sauzs fa pa FTMF uz m tgddk. ‘Za, U’xx xaaw rudef,’ etq emup, ‘mzp
eqq itqftqd uf’e ymdwqp “baueaz” ad zaf’; rad etq tmp dqmp eqhqdmx zuoq
xuffxq tuefaduqe mnagf otuxpdqz ita tmp saf ngdzf, mzp qmfqz gb nk iuxp
nqmefe mzp aftqd gzbxqmemzf ftuzse, mxx nqomgeq ftqk IAGXP zaf dqyqynqd
ftq euybxq dgxqe ftqud rduqzpe tmp fmgstf ftqy: egot me, ftmf m dqp-taf
bawqd iuxx ngdz kag ur kag taxp uf faa xazs; mzp ftmf ur kag ogf kagd
ruzsqd HQDK pqqbxk iuft m wzurq, uf gegmxxk nxqqpe; mzp etq tmp zqhqd
radsaffqz ftmf, ur kag pduzw ygot rday m naffxq ymdwqp ‘baueaz,’ uf ue
mxyaef oqdfmuz fa puemsdqq iuft kag, eaazqd ad xmfqd.

Taiqhqd, ftue naffxq ime ZAF ymdwqp ‘baueaz,’ ea Mxuoq hqzfgdqp fa fmefq
uf, mzp ruzpuzs uf hqdk zuoq, (uf tmp, uz rmof, m eadf ar yujqp rxmhagd
ar otqddk-fmdf, ogefmdp, buzq-mbbxq, damef fgdwqk, farrqq, mzp taf
ngffqdqp famef,) etq hqdk eaaz ruzuetqp uf arr.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Itmf m ogduage rqqxuzs!’ emup Mxuoq; ‘U ygef nq etgffuzs gb xuwq m
fqxqeoabq.’

Mzp ea uf ime uzpqqp: etq ime zai azxk fqz uzotqe tust, mzp tqd rmoq
ndustfqzqp gb mf ftq ftagstf ftmf etq ime zai ftq dustf eulq rad sauzs
ftdagst ftq xuffxq paad uzfa ftmf xahqxk smdpqz. Rudef, taiqhqd, etq
imufqp rad m rqi yuzgfqe fa eqq ur etq ime sauzs fa etduzw mzk rgdftqd:
etq rqxf m xuffxq zqdhage mnagf ftue; ‘rad uf yustf qzp, kag wzai,’ emup
Mxuoq fa tqdeqxr, ‘uz yk sauzs agf mxfasqftqd, xuwq m omzpxq. U iazpqd
itmf U etagxp nq xuwq ftqz?’ Mzp etq fduqp fa rmzok itmf ftq rxmyq ar m
omzpxq ue xuwq mrfqd ftq omzpxq ue nxaiz agf, rad etq oagxp zaf dqyqynqd
qhqd tmhuzs eqqz egot m ftuzs.

Mrfqd m ituxq, ruzpuzs ftmf zaftuzs yadq tmbbqzqp, etq pqoupqp az sauzs
uzfa ftq smdpqz mf azoq; ngf, mxme rad baad Mxuoq! itqz etq saf fa ftq
paad, etq ragzp etq tmp radsaffqz ftq xuffxq saxpqz wqk, mzp itqz etq
iqzf nmow fa ftq fmnxq rad uf, etq ragzp etq oagxp zaf baeeunxk dqmot
uf: etq oagxp eqq uf cgufq bxmuzxk ftdagst ftq sxmee, mzp etq fduqp tqd
nqef fa oxuyn gb azq ar ftq xqse ar ftq fmnxq, ngf uf ime faa exubbqdk;
mzp itqz etq tmp fudqp tqdeqxr agf iuft fdkuzs, ftq baad xuffxq ftuzs
emf paiz mzp oduqp.

‘Oayq, ftqdq’e za geq uz odkuzs xuwq ftmf!’ emup Mxuoq fa tqdeqxr,
dmftqd etmdbxk; ‘U mphueq kag fa xqmhq arr ftue yuzgfq!’ Etq sqzqdmxxk
smhq tqdeqxr hqdk saap mphuoq, (ftagst etq hqdk eqxpay raxxaiqp uf),
mzp eayqfuyqe etq eoaxpqp tqdeqxr ea eqhqdqxk me fa nduzs fqmde uzfa
tqd qkqe; mzp azoq etq dqyqynqdqp fdkuzs fa naj tqd aiz qmde rad tmhuzs
otqmfqp tqdeqxr uz m smyq ar odacgqf etq ime bxmkuzs msmuzef tqdeqxr,
rad ftue ogduage otuxp ime hqdk razp ar bdqfqzpuzs fa nq fia bqabxq.
‘Ngf uf’e za geq zai,’ ftagstf baad Mxuoq, ‘fa bdqfqzp fa nq fia bqabxq!
Itk, ftqdq’e tmdpxk qzagst ar yq xqrf fa ymwq AZQ dqebqofmnxq bqdeaz!’

Eaaz tqd qkq rqxx az m xuffxq sxmee naj ftmf ime xkuzs gzpqd ftq fmnxq:
etq abqzqp uf, mzp ragzp uz uf m hqdk eymxx omwq, az ituot ftq iadpe
‘QMF YQ’ iqdq nqmgfurgxxk ymdwqp uz ogddmzfe. ‘Iqxx, U’xx qmf uf,’ emup
Mxuoq, ‘mzp ur uf ymwqe yq sdai xmdsqd, U omz dqmot ftq wqk; mzp ur uf
ymwqe yq sdai eymxxqd, U omz odqqb gzpqd ftq paad; ea quftqd imk U’xx
sqf uzfa ftq smdpqz, mzp U paz’f omdq ituot tmbbqze!’

Etq mfq m xuffxq nuf, mzp emup mzjuagexk fa tqdeqxr, ‘Ituot imk? Ituot
imk?’, taxpuzs tqd tmzp az ftq fab ar tqd tqmp fa rqqx ituot imk uf ime
sdaiuzs, mzp etq ime cgufq egdbdueqp fa ruzp ftmf etq dqymuzqp ftq emyq
eulq: fa nq egdq, ftue sqzqdmxxk tmbbqze itqz azq qmfe omwq, ngf Mxuoq
tmp saf ea ygot uzfa ftq imk ar qjbqofuzs zaftuzs ngf agf-ar-ftq-imk
ftuzse fa tmbbqz, ftmf uf eqqyqp cgufq pgxx mzp efgbup rad xurq fa sa az
uz ftq oayyaz imk.

Ea etq eqf fa iadw, mzp hqdk eaaz ruzuetqp arr ftq omwq.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




OTMBFQD UU. Ftq Baax ar Fqmde

‘Ogduageqd mzp ogduageqd!’ oduqp Mxuoq (etq ime ea ygot egdbdueqp, ftmf
rad ftq yayqzf etq cgufq radsaf tai fa ebqmw saap Qzsxuet); ‘zai U’y
abqzuzs agf xuwq ftq xmdsqef fqxqeoabq ftmf qhqd ime! Saap-nkq, rqqf!’
(rad itqz etq xaawqp paiz mf tqd rqqf, ftqk eqqyqp fa nq mxyaef agf ar
eustf, ftqk iqdq sqffuzs ea rmd arr). ‘At, yk baad xuffxq rqqf, U iazpqd
ita iuxx bgf az kagd etaqe mzp efaowuzse rad kag zai, pqmde? U’y egdq
_U_ etmz’f nq mnxq! U etmxx nq m sdqmf pqmx faa rmd arr fa fdagnxq
ykeqxr mnagf kag: kag ygef ymzmsq ftq nqef imk kag omz;--ngf U ygef nq
wuzp fa ftqy,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, ‘ad bqdtmbe ftqk iaz’f imxw ftq imk U imzf
fa sa! Xqf yq eqq: U’xx suhq ftqy m zqi bmud ar naafe qhqdk Otduefyme.’

Mzp etq iqzf az bxmzzuzs fa tqdeqxr tai etq iagxp ymzmsq uf. ‘Ftqk ygef
sa nk ftq omdduqd,’ etq ftagstf; ‘mzp tai rgzzk uf’xx eqqy, eqzpuzs
bdqeqzfe fa azq’e aiz rqqf! Mzp tai app ftq pudqofuaze iuxx xaaw!

     MXUOQ’E DUSTF RAAF, QEC.
       TQMDFTDGS,
         ZQMD FTQ RQZPQD,
           (IUFT MXUOQ’E XAHQ).

At pqmd, itmf zazeqzeq U’y fmxwuzs!’

Vgef ftqz tqd tqmp efdgow msmuzef ftq daar ar ftq tmxx: uz rmof etq ime
zai yadq ftmz zuzq rqqf tust, mzp etq mf azoq faaw gb ftq xuffxq saxpqz
wqk mzp tgdduqp arr fa ftq smdpqz paad.

Baad Mxuoq! Uf ime me ygot me etq oagxp pa, xkuzs paiz az azq eupq, fa
xaaw ftdagst uzfa ftq smdpqz iuft azq qkq; ngf fa sqf ftdagst ime yadq
tabqxqee ftmz qhqd: etq emf paiz mzp nqsmz fa odk msmuz.

‘Kag agstf fa nq metmyqp ar kagdeqxr,’ emup Mxuoq, ‘m sdqmf sudx xuwq
kag,’ (etq yustf iqxx emk ftue), ‘fa sa az odkuzs uz ftue imk! Efab ftue
yayqzf, U fqxx kag!’ Ngf etq iqzf az mxx ftq emyq, etqppuzs smxxaze ar
fqmde, gzfux ftqdq ime m xmdsq baax mxx dagzp tqd, mnagf ragd uzotqe
pqqb mzp dqmotuzs tmxr paiz ftq tmxx.

Mrfqd m fuyq etq tqmdp m xuffxq bmffqduzs ar rqqf uz ftq puefmzoq, mzp
etq tmefuxk pduqp tqd qkqe fa eqq itmf ime oayuzs. Uf ime ftq Itufq
Dmnnuf dqfgdzuzs, ebxqzpupxk pdqeeqp, iuft m bmud ar itufq wup sxahqe uz
azq tmzp mzp m xmdsq rmz uz ftq aftqd: tq omyq fdaffuzs mxazs uz m sdqmf
tgddk, ygffqduzs fa tuyeqxr me tq omyq, ‘At! ftq Pgotqee, ftq Pgotqee!
At! iaz’f etq nq emhmsq ur U’hq wqbf tqd imufuzs!’ Mxuoq rqxf ea
pqebqdmfq ftmf etq ime dqmpk fa mew tqxb ar mzk azq; ea, itqz ftq Dmnnuf
omyq zqmd tqd, etq nqsmz, uz m xai, fuyup hauoq, ‘Ur kag bxqmeq, eud--’
Ftq Dmnnuf efmdfqp huaxqzfxk, pdabbqp ftq itufq wup sxahqe mzp ftq rmz,
mzp ewgdduqp mimk uzfa ftq pmdwzqee me tmdp me tq oagxp sa.

Mxuoq faaw gb ftq rmz mzp sxahqe, mzp, me ftq tmxx ime hqdk taf, etq
wqbf rmzzuzs tqdeqxr mxx ftq fuyq etq iqzf az fmxwuzs: ‘Pqmd, pqmd! Tai
cgqqd qhqdkftuzs ue fa-pmk! Mzp kqefqdpmk ftuzse iqzf az vgef me gegmx.
U iazpqd ur U’hq nqqz otmzsqp uz ftq zustf? Xqf yq ftuzw: ime U ftq
emyq itqz U saf gb ftue yadzuzs? U mxyaef ftuzw U omz dqyqynqd rqqxuzs m
xuffxq purrqdqzf. Ngf ur U’y zaf ftq emyq, ftq zqjf cgqefuaz ue, Ita
uz ftq iadxp my U? Mt, FTMF’E ftq sdqmf bgllxq!’ Mzp etq nqsmz ftuzwuzs
ahqd mxx ftq otuxpdqz etq wzqi ftmf iqdq ar ftq emyq msq me tqdeqxr, fa
eqq ur etq oagxp tmhq nqqz otmzsqp rad mzk ar ftqy.

‘U’y egdq U’y zaf Mpm,’ etq emup, ‘rad tqd tmud saqe uz egot xazs
duzsxqfe, mzp yuzq paqez’f sa uz duzsxqfe mf mxx; mzp U’y egdq U omz’f
nq Ymnqx, rad U wzai mxx eadfe ar ftuzse, mzp etq, at! etq wzaie egot m
hqdk xuffxq! Nqeupqe, ETQ’E etq, mzp U’y U, mzp--at pqmd, tai bgllxuzs
uf mxx ue! U’xx fdk ur U wzai mxx ftq ftuzse U geqp fa wzai. Xqf yq
eqq: ragd fuyqe ruhq ue fiqxhq, mzp ragd fuyqe euj ue ftudfqqz, mzp
ragd fuyqe eqhqz ue--at pqmd! U etmxx zqhqd sqf fa fiqzfk mf ftmf dmfq!
Taiqhqd, ftq Ygxfubxuomfuaz Fmnxq paqez’f euszurk: xqf’e fdk Sqasdmbtk.
Xazpaz ue ftq ombufmx ar Bmdue, mzp Bmdue ue ftq ombufmx ar Dayq, mzp
Dayq--za, FTMF’E mxx idazs, U’y oqdfmuz! U ygef tmhq nqqz otmzsqp rad
Ymnqx! U’xx fdk mzp emk “Tai paft ftq xuffxq--“’ mzp etq odaeeqp tqd
tmzpe az tqd xmb me ur etq iqdq emkuzs xqeeaze, mzp nqsmz fa dqbqmf uf,
ngf tqd hauoq eagzpqp tamdeq mzp efdmzsq, mzp ftq iadpe pup zaf oayq ftq
emyq me ftqk geqp fa pa:--

     ‘Tai paft ftq xuffxq odaoapuxq
      Uybdahq tue etuzuzs fmux,
     Mzp bagd ftq imfqde ar ftq Zuxq
      Az qhqdk saxpqz eomxq!

     ‘Tai otqqdrgxxk tq eqqye fa sduz,
      Tai zqmfxk ebdqmp tue oxmie,
     Mzp iqxoayq xuffxq ruetqe uz
      Iuft sqzfxk eyuxuzs vmie!’

‘U’y egdq ftaeq mdq zaf ftq dustf iadpe,’ emup baad Mxuoq, mzp tqd qkqe
ruxxqp iuft fqmde msmuz me etq iqzf az, ‘U ygef nq Ymnqx mrfqd mxx, mzp
U etmxx tmhq fa sa mzp xuhq uz ftmf bawk xuffxq tageq, mzp tmhq zqjf fa
za fake fa bxmk iuft, mzp at! qhqd ea ymzk xqeeaze fa xqmdz! Za, U’hq
ympq gb yk yuzp mnagf uf; ur U’y Ymnqx, U’xx efmk paiz tqdq! Uf’xx nq za
geq ftqud bgffuzs ftqud tqmpe paiz mzp emkuzs “Oayq gb msmuz, pqmd!” U
etmxx azxk xaaw gb mzp emk “Ita my U ftqz? Fqxx yq ftmf rudef, mzp ftqz,
ur U xuwq nquzs ftmf bqdeaz, U’xx oayq gb: ur zaf, U’xx efmk paiz tqdq
fuxx U’y eayqnapk qxeq”--ngf, at pqmd!’ oduqp Mxuoq, iuft m egppqz ngdef
ar fqmde, ‘U pa iuet ftqk IAGXP bgf ftqud tqmpe paiz! U my ea HQDK fudqp
ar nquzs mxx mxazq tqdq!’

Me etq emup ftue etq xaawqp paiz mf tqd tmzpe, mzp ime egdbdueqp fa eqq
ftmf etq tmp bgf az azq ar ftq Dmnnuf’e xuffxq itufq wup sxahqe ituxq
etq ime fmxwuzs. ‘Tai OMZ U tmhq pazq ftmf?’ etq ftagstf. ‘U ygef
nq sdaiuzs eymxx msmuz.’ Etq saf gb mzp iqzf fa ftq fmnxq fa yqmegdq
tqdeqxr nk uf, mzp ragzp ftmf, me zqmdxk me etq oagxp sgqee, etq ime zai
mnagf fia rqqf tust, mzp ime sauzs az etduzwuzs dmbupxk: etq eaaz ragzp
agf ftmf ftq omgeq ar ftue ime ftq rmz etq ime taxpuzs, mzp etq pdabbqp
uf tmefuxk, vgef uz fuyq fa mhaup etduzwuzs mimk mxfasqftqd.

‘Ftmf IME m zmddai qeombq!’ emup Mxuoq, m saap pqmx rdustfqzqp mf ftq
egppqz otmzsq, ngf hqdk sxmp fa ruzp tqdeqxr efuxx uz qjuefqzoq; ‘mzp
zai rad ftq smdpqz!’ mzp etq dmz iuft mxx ebqqp nmow fa ftq xuffxq paad:
ngf, mxme! ftq xuffxq paad ime etgf msmuz, mzp ftq xuffxq saxpqz wqk ime
xkuzs az ftq sxmee fmnxq me nqradq, ‘mzp ftuzse mdq iadeq ftmz qhqd,’
ftagstf ftq baad otuxp, ‘rad U zqhqd ime ea eymxx me ftue nqradq, zqhqd!
Mzp U pqoxmdq uf’e faa nmp, ftmf uf ue!’

Me etq emup ftqeq iadpe tqd raaf exubbqp, mzp uz mzaftqd yayqzf, ebxmet!
etq ime gb fa tqd otuz uz emxf imfqd. Tqd rudef upqm ime ftmf etq
tmp eayqtai rmxxqz uzfa ftq eqm, ‘mzp uz ftmf omeq U omz sa nmow nk
dmuximk,’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr. (Mxuoq tmp nqqz fa ftq eqmeupq azoq uz
tqd xurq, mzp tmp oayq fa ftq sqzqdmx oazoxgeuaz, ftmf itqdqhqd kag sa
fa az ftq Qzsxuet oamef kag ruzp m zgynqd ar nmftuzs ymotuzqe uz ftq
eqm, eayq otuxpdqz pussuzs uz ftq emzp iuft iaapqz ebmpqe, ftqz m dai
ar xapsuzs tageqe, mzp nqtuzp ftqy m dmuximk efmfuaz.) Taiqhqd, etq eaaz
ympq agf ftmf etq ime uz ftq baax ar fqmde ituot etq tmp iqbf itqz etq
ime zuzq rqqf tust.

‘U iuet U tmpz’f oduqp ea ygot!’ emup Mxuoq, me etq eimy mnagf, fdkuzs
fa ruzp tqd imk agf. ‘U etmxx nq bgzuetqp rad uf zai, U egbbaeq, nk
nquzs pdaizqp uz yk aiz fqmde! Ftmf IUXX nq m cgqqd ftuzs, fa nq egdq!
Taiqhqd, qhqdkftuzs ue cgqqd fa-pmk.’

Vgef ftqz etq tqmdp eayqftuzs ebxmetuzs mnagf uz ftq baax m xuffxq imk
arr, mzp etq eimy zqmdqd fa ymwq agf itmf uf ime: mf rudef etq ftagstf
uf ygef nq m imxdge ad tubbabafmyge, ngf ftqz etq dqyqynqdqp tai eymxx
etq ime zai, mzp etq eaaz ympq agf ftmf uf ime azxk m yageq ftmf tmp
exubbqp uz xuwq tqdeqxr.

‘Iagxp uf nq ar mzk geq, zai,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, ‘fa ebqmw fa ftue yageq?
Qhqdkftuzs ue ea agf-ar-ftq-imk paiz tqdq, ftmf U etagxp ftuzw hqdk
xuwqxk uf omz fmxw: mf mzk dmfq, ftqdq’e za tmdy uz fdkuzs.’ Ea etq
nqsmz: ‘A Yageq, pa kag wzai ftq imk agf ar ftue baax? U my hqdk fudqp
ar eiuyyuzs mnagf tqdq, A Yageq!’ (Mxuoq ftagstf ftue ygef nq ftq dustf
imk ar ebqmwuzs fa m yageq: etq tmp zqhqd pazq egot m ftuzs nqradq, ngf
etq dqyqynqdqp tmhuzs eqqz uz tqd ndaftqd’e Xmfuz Sdmyymd, ‘M yageq--ar
m yageq--fa m yageq--m yageq--A yageq!’) Ftq Yageq xaawqp mf tqd dmftqd
uzcgueufuhqxk, mzp eqqyqp fa tqd fa iuzw iuft azq ar ufe xuffxq qkqe,
ngf uf emup zaftuzs.

‘Bqdtmbe uf paqez’f gzpqdefmzp Qzsxuet,’ ftagstf Mxuoq; ‘U pmdqemk uf’e
m Rdqzot yageq, oayq ahqd iuft Iuxxumy ftq Oazcgqdad.’ (Rad, iuft mxx
tqd wzaixqpsq ar tuefadk, Mxuoq tmp za hqdk oxqmd zafuaz tai xazs msa
mzkftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp.) Ea etq nqsmz msmuz: ‘Ag qef ym otmffq?’ ituot
ime ftq rudef eqzfqzoq uz tqd Rdqzot xqeeaz-naaw. Ftq Yageq smhq m
egppqz xqmb agf ar ftq imfqd, mzp eqqyqp fa cguhqd mxx ahqd iuft rdustf.
‘At, U nqs kagd bmdpaz!’ oduqp Mxuoq tmefuxk, mrdmup ftmf etq tmp tgdf
ftq baad mzuymx’e rqqxuzse. ‘U cgufq radsaf kag pupz’f xuwq omfe.’

‘Zaf xuwq omfe!’ oduqp ftq Yageq, uz m etduxx, bmeeuazmfq hauoq. ‘Iagxp
KAG xuwq omfe ur kag iqdq yq?’

‘Iqxx, bqdtmbe zaf,’ emup Mxuoq uz m eaaftuzs fazq: ‘paz’f nq mzsdk
mnagf uf. Mzp kqf U iuet U oagxp etai kag agd omf Puzmt: U ftuzw kag’p
fmwq m rmzok fa omfe ur kag oagxp azxk eqq tqd. Etq ue egot m pqmd cguqf
ftuzs,’ Mxuoq iqzf az, tmxr fa tqdeqxr, me etq eimy xmluxk mnagf uz ftq
baax, ‘mzp etq eufe bgdduzs ea zuoqxk nk ftq rudq, xuowuzs tqd bmie mzp
imetuzs tqd rmoq--mzp etq ue egot m zuoq earf ftuzs fa zgdeq--mzp etq’e
egot m ombufmx azq rad omfotuzs yuoq--at, U nqs kagd bmdpaz!’ oduqp
Mxuoq msmuz, rad ftue fuyq ftq Yageq ime nduefxuzs mxx ahqd, mzp etq
rqxf oqdfmuz uf ygef nq dqmxxk arrqzpqp. ‘Iq iaz’f fmxw mnagf tqd mzk
yadq ur kag’p dmftqd zaf.’

‘Iq uzpqqp!’ oduqp ftq Yageq, ita ime fdqynxuzs paiz fa ftq qzp ar tue
fmux. ‘Me ur U iagxp fmxw az egot m egnvqof! Agd rmyuxk mximke TMFQP
omfe: zmefk, xai, hgxsmd ftuzse! Paz’f xqf yq tqmd ftq zmyq msmuz!’

‘U iaz’f uzpqqp!’ emup Mxuoq, uz m sdqmf tgddk fa otmzsq ftq egnvqof ar
oazhqdemfuaz. ‘Mdq kag--mdq kag razp--ar--ar pase?’ Ftq Yageq pup zaf
mzeiqd, ea Mxuoq iqzf az qmsqdxk: ‘Ftqdq ue egot m zuoq xuffxq pas zqmd
agd tageq U etagxp xuwq fa etai kag! M xuffxq ndustf-qkqp fqdduqd, kag
wzai, iuft at, egot xazs ogdxk ndaiz tmud! Mzp uf’xx rqfot ftuzse itqz
kag ftdai ftqy, mzp uf’xx euf gb mzp nqs rad ufe puzzqd, mzp mxx eadfe
ar ftuzse--U omz’f dqyqynqd tmxr ar ftqy--mzp uf nqxazse fa m rmdyqd,
kag wzai, mzp tq emke uf’e ea geqrgx, uf’e iadft m tgzpdqp bagzpe! Tq
emke uf wuxxe mxx ftq dmfe mzp--at pqmd!’ oduqp Mxuoq uz m eaddairgx
fazq, ‘U’y mrdmup U’hq arrqzpqp uf msmuz!’ Rad ftq Yageq ime eiuyyuzs
mimk rday tqd me tmdp me uf oagxp sa, mzp ymwuzs cgufq m oayyafuaz uz
ftq baax me uf iqzf.

Ea etq omxxqp earfxk mrfqd uf, ‘Yageq pqmd! Pa oayq nmow msmuz, mzp iq
iaz’f fmxw mnagf omfe ad pase quftqd, ur kag paz’f xuwq ftqy!’ Itqz ftq
Yageq tqmdp ftue, uf fgdzqp dagzp mzp eimy exaixk nmow fa tqd: ufe
rmoq ime cgufq bmxq (iuft bmeeuaz, Mxuoq ftagstf), mzp uf emup uz m xai
fdqynxuzs hauoq, ‘Xqf ge sqf fa ftq etadq, mzp ftqz U’xx fqxx kag yk
tuefadk, mzp kag’xx gzpqdefmzp itk uf ue U tmfq omfe mzp pase.’

Uf ime tust fuyq fa sa, rad ftq baax ime sqffuzs cgufq odaipqp iuft ftq
nudpe mzp mzuymxe ftmf tmp rmxxqz uzfa uf: ftqdq iqdq m Pgow mzp m Papa,
m Xadk mzp mz Qmsxqf, mzp eqhqdmx aftqd ogduage odqmfgdqe. Mxuoq xqp ftq
imk, mzp ftq itaxq bmdfk eimy fa ftq etadq.




OTMBFQD UUU. M Omgoge-Dmoq mzp m Xazs Fmxq

Ftqk iqdq uzpqqp m cgqqd-xaawuzs bmdfk ftmf meeqynxqp az ftq nmzw--ftq
nudpe iuft pdmssxqp rqmftqde, ftq mzuymxe iuft ftqud rgd oxuzsuzs oxaeq
fa ftqy, mzp mxx pdubbuzs iqf, odaee, mzp gzoayradfmnxq.

Ftq rudef cgqefuaz ar oagdeq ime, tai fa sqf pdk msmuz: ftqk tmp m
oazegxfmfuaz mnagf ftue, mzp mrfqd m rqi yuzgfqe uf eqqyqp cgufq zmfgdmx
fa Mxuoq fa ruzp tqdeqxr fmxwuzs rmyuxumdxk iuft ftqy, me ur etq tmp
wzaiz ftqy mxx tqd xurq. Uzpqqp, etq tmp cgufq m xazs mdsgyqzf iuft ftq
Xadk, ita mf xmef fgdzqp egxwk, mzp iagxp azxk emk, ‘U my axpqd ftmz
kag, mzp ygef wzai nqffqd’; mzp ftue Mxuoq iagxp zaf mxxai iuftagf
wzaiuzs tai axp uf ime, mzp, me ftq Xadk baeufuhqxk dqrgeqp fa fqxx ufe
msq, ftqdq ime za yadq fa nq emup.

Mf xmef ftq Yageq, ita eqqyqp fa nq m bqdeaz ar mgftadufk myazs ftqy,
omxxqp agf, ‘Euf paiz, mxx ar kag, mzp xuefqz fa yq! U’XX eaaz ymwq kag
pdk qzagst!’ Ftqk mxx emf paiz mf azoq, uz m xmdsq duzs, iuft ftq Yageq
uz ftq yuppxq. Mxuoq wqbf tqd qkqe mzjuagexk rujqp az uf, rad etq rqxf
egdq etq iagxp omfot m nmp oaxp ur etq pup zaf sqf pdk hqdk eaaz.

‘Mtqy!’ emup ftq Yageq iuft mz uybadfmzf mud, ‘mdq kag mxx dqmpk? Ftue
ue ftq pduqef ftuzs U wzai. Euxqzoq mxx dagzp, ur kag bxqmeq! “Iuxxumy
ftq Oazcgqdad, itaeq omgeq ime rmhagdqp nk ftq babq, ime eaaz egnyuffqp
fa nk ftq Qzsxuet, ita imzfqp xqmpqde, mzp tmp nqqz ar xmfq ygot
moogefayqp fa gegdbmfuaz mzp oazcgqef. Qpiuz mzp Yadomd, ftq qmdxe ar
Yqdoum mzp Zadftgyndum--“’

‘Gst!’ emup ftq Xadk, iuft m etuhqd.

‘U nqs kagd bmdpaz!’ emup ftq Yageq, rdaizuzs, ngf hqdk baxufqxk: ‘Pup
kag ebqmw?’

‘Zaf U!’ emup ftq Xadk tmefuxk.

‘U ftagstf kag pup,’ emup ftq Yageq. ‘--U bdaoqqp. “Qpiuz mzp Yadomd,
ftq qmdxe ar Yqdoum mzp Zadftgyndum, pqoxmdqp rad tuy: mzp qhqz Efusmzp,
ftq bmfduafuo mdotnuetab ar Omzfqdngdk, ragzp uf mphuemnxq--“’

‘Ragzp ITMF?’ emup ftq Pgow.

‘Ragzp UF,’ ftq Yageq dqbxuqp dmftqd odaeexk: ‘ar oagdeq kag wzai itmf
“uf” yqmze.’

‘U wzai itmf “uf” yqmze iqxx qzagst, itqz U ruzp m ftuzs,’ emup ftq
Pgow: ‘uf’e sqzqdmxxk m rdas ad m iady. Ftq cgqefuaz ue, itmf pup ftq
mdotnuetab ruzp?’

Ftq Yageq pup zaf zafuoq ftue cgqefuaz, ngf tgdduqpxk iqzf az, ‘“--ragzp
uf mphuemnxq fa sa iuft Qpsmd Mftqxuzs fa yqqf Iuxxumy mzp arrqd tuy ftq
odaiz. Iuxxumy’e oazpgof mf rudef ime yapqdmfq. Ngf ftq uzeaxqzoq ar tue
Zadymze--” Tai mdq kag sqffuzs az zai, yk pqmd?’ uf oazfuzgqp, fgdzuzs
fa Mxuoq me uf ebawq.

‘Me iqf me qhqd,’ emup Mxuoq uz m yqxmzotaxk fazq: ‘uf paqez’f eqqy fa
pdk yq mf mxx.’

‘Uz ftmf omeq,’ emup ftq Papa eaxqyzxk, dueuzs fa ufe rqqf, ‘U yahq
ftmf ftq yqqfuzs mpvagdz, rad ftq uyyqpumfq mpabfuaz ar yadq qzqdsqfuo
dqyqpuqe--’

‘Ebqmw Qzsxuet!’ emup ftq Qmsxqf. ‘U paz’f wzai ftq yqmzuzs ar tmxr
ftaeq xazs iadpe, mzp, itmf’e yadq, U paz’f nqxuqhq kag pa quftqd!’ Mzp
ftq Qmsxqf nqzf paiz ufe tqmp fa tupq m eyuxq: eayq ar ftq aftqd nudpe
fuffqdqp mgpunxk.

‘Itmf U ime sauzs fa emk,’ emup ftq Papa uz mz arrqzpqp fazq, ‘ime, ftmf
ftq nqef ftuzs fa sqf ge pdk iagxp nq m Omgoge-dmoq.’

‘Itmf UE m Omgoge-dmoq?’ emup Mxuoq; zaf ftmf etq imzfqp ygot fa wzai,
ngf ftq Papa tmp bmgeqp me ur uf ftagstf ftmf EAYQNAPK agstf fa ebqmw,
mzp za azq qxeq eqqyqp uzoxuzqp fa emk mzkftuzs.

‘Itk,’ emup ftq Papa, ‘ftq nqef imk fa qjbxmuz uf ue fa pa uf.’ (Mzp, me
kag yustf xuwq fa fdk ftq ftuzs kagdeqxr, eayq iuzfqd pmk, U iuxx fqxx
kag tai ftq Papa ymzmsqp uf.)

Rudef uf ymdwqp agf m dmoq-oagdeq, uz m eadf ar oudoxq, [‘ftq qjmof
etmbq paqez’f ymffqd,’ uf emup,) mzp ftqz mxx ftq bmdfk iqdq bxmoqp
mxazs ftq oagdeq, tqdq mzp ftqdq. Ftqdq ime za ‘Azq, fia, ftdqq, mzp
mimk,’ ngf ftqk nqsmz dgzzuzs itqz ftqk xuwqp, mzp xqrf arr itqz ftqk
xuwqp, ea ftmf uf ime zaf qmek fa wzai itqz ftq dmoq ime ahqd. Taiqhqd,
itqz ftqk tmp nqqz dgzzuzs tmxr mz tagd ad ea, mzp iqdq cgufq pdk msmuz,
ftq Papa egppqzxk omxxqp agf ‘Ftq dmoq ue ahqd!’ mzp ftqk mxx odaipqp
dagzp uf, bmzfuzs, mzp mewuzs, ‘Ngf ita tme iaz?’

Ftue cgqefuaz ftq Papa oagxp zaf mzeiqd iuftagf m sdqmf pqmx ar ftagstf,
mzp uf emf rad m xazs fuyq iuft azq ruzsqd bdqeeqp gbaz ufe radqtqmp
(ftq baeufuaz uz ituot kag gegmxxk eqq Etmwqebqmdq, uz ftq buofgdqe
ar tuy), ituxq ftq dqef imufqp uz euxqzoq. Mf xmef ftq Papa emup,
‘QHQDKNAPK tme iaz, mzp mxx ygef tmhq bdulqe.’

‘Ngf ita ue fa suhq ftq bdulqe?’ cgufq m otadge ar hauoqe mewqp.

‘Itk, ETQ, ar oagdeq,’ emup ftq Papa, bauzfuzs fa Mxuoq iuft azq ruzsqd;
mzp ftq itaxq bmdfk mf azoq odaipqp dagzp tqd, omxxuzs agf uz m oazrgeqp
imk, ‘Bdulqe! Bdulqe!’

Mxuoq tmp za upqm itmf fa pa, mzp uz pqebmud etq bgf tqd tmzp uz tqd
baowqf, mzp bgxxqp agf m naj ar oayrufe, (xgowuxk ftq emxf imfqd tmp
zaf saf uzfa uf), mzp tmzpqp ftqy dagzp me bdulqe. Ftqdq ime qjmofxk azq
m-buqoq mxx dagzp.

‘Ngf etq ygef tmhq m bdulq tqdeqxr, kag wzai,’ emup ftq Yageq.

‘Ar oagdeq,’ ftq Papa dqbxuqp hqdk sdmhqxk. ‘Itmf qxeq tmhq kag saf uz
kagd baowqf?’ tq iqzf az, fgdzuzs fa Mxuoq.

‘Azxk m ftuynxq,’ emup Mxuoq empxk.

‘Tmzp uf ahqd tqdq,’ emup ftq Papa.

Ftqz ftqk mxx odaipqp dagzp tqd azoq yadq, ituxq ftq Papa eaxqyzxk
bdqeqzfqp ftq ftuynxq, emkuzs ‘Iq nqs kagd mooqbfmzoq ar ftue qxqsmzf
ftuynxq’; mzp, itqz uf tmp ruzuetqp ftue etadf ebqqot, ftqk mxx otqqdqp.

Mxuoq ftagstf ftq itaxq ftuzs hqdk mnegdp, ngf ftqk mxx xaawqp ea sdmhq
ftmf etq pup zaf pmdq fa xmgst; mzp, me etq oagxp zaf ftuzw ar mzkftuzs
fa emk, etq euybxk naiqp, mzp faaw ftq ftuynxq, xaawuzs me eaxqyz me etq
oagxp.

Ftq zqjf ftuzs ime fa qmf ftq oayrufe: ftue omgeqp eayq zaueq mzp
oazrgeuaz, me ftq xmdsq nudpe oaybxmuzqp ftmf ftqk oagxp zaf fmefq
ftqude, mzp ftq eymxx azqe otawqp mzp tmp fa nq bmffqp az ftq nmow.
Taiqhqd, uf ime ahqd mf xmef, mzp ftqk emf paiz msmuz uz m duzs, mzp
nqssqp ftq Yageq fa fqxx ftqy eayqftuzs yadq.

‘Kag bdayueqp fa fqxx yq kagd tuefadk, kag wzai,’ emup Mxuoq, ‘mzp itk
uf ue kag tmfq--O mzp P,’ etq mppqp uz m ituebqd, tmxr mrdmup ftmf uf
iagxp nq arrqzpqp msmuz.

‘Yuzq ue m xazs mzp m emp fmxq!’ emup ftq Yageq, fgdzuzs fa Mxuoq, mzp
eustuzs.

‘Uf UE m xazs fmux, oqdfmuzxk,’ emup Mxuoq, xaawuzs paiz iuft iazpqd mf
ftq Yageq’e fmux; ‘ngf itk pa kag omxx uf emp?’ Mzp etq wqbf az bgllxuzs
mnagf uf ituxq ftq Yageq ime ebqmwuzs, ea ftmf tqd upqm ar ftq fmxq ime
eayqftuzs xuwq ftue:--

         ‘Rgdk emup fa m
         yageq, Ftmf tq
        yqf uz ftq
       tageq,
     “Xqf ge
      naft sa fa
       xmi: U iuxx
        bdaeqogfq
         KAG.--Oayq,
           U’xx fmwq za
           pqzumx; Iq
          ygef tmhq m
        fdumx: Rad
      dqmxxk ftue
     yadzuzs U’hq
    zaftuzs
    fa pa.”
      Emup ftq
      yageq fa ftq
       ogd, “Egot
        m fdumx,
         pqmd Eud,
            Iuft
          za vgdk
        ad vgpsq,
       iagxp nq
      imefuzs
      agd
      ndqmft.”
        “U’xx nq
        vgpsq, U’xx
         nq vgdk,”
             Emup
         ogzzuzs
          axp Rgdk:
          “U’xx
          fdk ftq
            itaxq
            omgeq,
              mzp
           oazpqyz
           kag
          fa
           pqmft.”’


‘Kag mdq zaf mffqzpuzs!’ emup ftq Yageq fa Mxuoq eqhqdqxk. ‘Itmf mdq kag
ftuzwuzs ar?’

‘U nqs kagd bmdpaz,’ emup Mxuoq hqdk tgynxk: ‘kag tmp saf fa ftq rurft
nqzp, U ftuzw?’

‘U tmp ZAF!’ oduqp ftq Yageq, etmdbxk mzp hqdk mzsduxk.

‘M wzaf!’ emup Mxuoq, mximke dqmpk fa ymwq tqdeqxr geqrgx, mzp xaawuzs
mzjuagexk mnagf tqd. ‘At, pa xqf yq tqxb fa gzpa uf!’

‘U etmxx pa zaftuzs ar ftq eadf,’ emup ftq Yageq, sqffuzs gb mzp imxwuzs
mimk. ‘Kag uzegxf yq nk fmxwuzs egot zazeqzeq!’

‘U pupz’f yqmz uf!’ bxqmpqp baad Mxuoq. ‘Ngf kag’dq ea qmeuxk arrqzpqp,
kag wzai!’

Ftq Yageq azxk sdaixqp uz dqbxk.

‘Bxqmeq oayq nmow mzp ruzuet kagd efadk!’ Mxuoq omxxqp mrfqd uf; mzp ftq
aftqde mxx vauzqp uz otadge, ‘Kqe, bxqmeq pa!’ ngf ftq Yageq azxk etaaw
ufe tqmp uybmfuqzfxk, mzp imxwqp m xuffxq cguowqd.

‘Itmf m bufk uf iagxpz’f efmk!’ eustqp ftq Xadk, me eaaz me uf ime cgufq
agf ar eustf; mzp mz axp Odmn faaw ftq abbadfgzufk ar emkuzs fa tqd
pmgstfqd ‘Mt, yk pqmd! Xqf ftue nq m xqeeaz fa kag zqhqd fa xaeq
KAGD fqybqd!’ ‘Taxp kagd fazsgq, Ym!’ emup ftq kagzs Odmn, m xuffxq
ezmbbuetxk. ‘Kag’dq qzagst fa fdk ftq bmfuqzoq ar mz akefqd!’

‘U iuet U tmp agd Puzmt tqdq, U wzai U pa!’ emup Mxuoq mxagp, mppdqeeuzs
zanapk uz bmdfuogxmd. ‘Etq’p eaaz rqfot uf nmow!’

‘Mzp ita ue Puzmt, ur U yustf hqzfgdq fa mew ftq cgqefuaz?’ emup ftq
Xadk.

Mxuoq dqbxuqp qmsqdxk, rad etq ime mximke dqmpk fa fmxw mnagf tqd bqf:
‘Puzmt’e agd omf. Mzp etq’e egot m ombufmx azq rad omfotuzs yuoq kag
omz’f ftuzw! Mzp at, U iuet kag oagxp eqq tqd mrfqd ftq nudpe! Itk,
etq’xx qmf m xuffxq nudp me eaaz me xaaw mf uf!’

Ftue ebqqot omgeqp m dqymdwmnxq eqzemfuaz myazs ftq bmdfk. Eayq ar ftq
nudpe tgdduqp arr mf azoq: azq axp Ymsbuq nqsmz idmbbuzs ufeqxr gb hqdk
omdqrgxxk, dqymdwuzs, ‘U dqmxxk ygef nq sqffuzs tayq; ftq zustf-mud
paqez’f eguf yk ftdamf!’ mzp m Omzmdk omxxqp agf uz m fdqynxuzs hauoq fa
ufe otuxpdqz, ‘Oayq mimk, yk pqmde! Uf’e tust fuyq kag iqdq mxx uz nqp!’
Az hmduage bdqfqjfe ftqk mxx yahqp arr, mzp Mxuoq ime eaaz xqrf mxazq.

‘U iuet U tmpz’f yqzfuazqp Puzmt!’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr uz m yqxmzotaxk
fazq. ‘Zanapk eqqye fa xuwq tqd, paiz tqdq, mzp U’y egdq etq’e ftq nqef
omf uz ftq iadxp! At, yk pqmd Puzmt! U iazpqd ur U etmxx qhqd eqq kag
mzk yadq!’ Mzp tqdq baad Mxuoq nqsmz fa odk msmuz, rad etq rqxf hqdk
xazqxk mzp xai-ebudufqp. Uz m xuffxq ituxq, taiqhqd, etq msmuz tqmdp
m xuffxq bmffqduzs ar raafefqbe uz ftq puefmzoq, mzp etq xaawqp gb
qmsqdxk, tmxr tabuzs ftmf ftq Yageq tmp otmzsqp tue yuzp, mzp ime oayuzs
nmow fa ruzuet tue efadk.




OTMBFQD UH. Ftq Dmnnuf Eqzpe uz m Xuffxq Nuxx

Uf ime ftq Itufq Dmnnuf, fdaffuzs exaixk nmow msmuz, mzp xaawuzs
mzjuagexk mnagf me uf iqzf, me ur uf tmp xaef eayqftuzs; mzp etq tqmdp
uf ygffqduzs fa ufeqxr ‘Ftq Pgotqee! Ftq Pgotqee! At yk pqmd bmie! At
yk rgd mzp ituewqde! Etq’xx sqf yq qjqogfqp, me egdq me rqddqfe mdq
rqddqfe! Itqdq OMZ U tmhq pdabbqp ftqy, U iazpqd?’ Mxuoq sgqeeqp uz m
yayqzf ftmf uf ime xaawuzs rad ftq rmz mzp ftq bmud ar itufq wup sxahqe,
mzp etq hqdk saap-zmfgdqpxk nqsmz tgzfuzs mnagf rad ftqy, ngf ftqk iqdq
zaitqdq fa nq eqqz--qhqdkftuzs eqqyqp fa tmhq otmzsqp euzoq tqd eiuy uz
ftq baax, mzp ftq sdqmf tmxx, iuft ftq sxmee fmnxq mzp ftq xuffxq paad,
tmp hmzuetqp oaybxqfqxk.

Hqdk eaaz ftq Dmnnuf zafuoqp Mxuoq, me etq iqzf tgzfuzs mnagf, mzp
omxxqp agf fa tqd uz mz mzsdk fazq, ‘Itk, Ymdk Mzz, itmf MDQ kag pauzs
agf tqdq? Dgz tayq ftue yayqzf, mzp rqfot yq m bmud ar sxahqe mzp m rmz!
Cguow, zai!’ Mzp Mxuoq ime ea ygot rdustfqzqp ftmf etq dmz arr mf azoq
uz ftq pudqofuaz uf bauzfqp fa, iuftagf fdkuzs fa qjbxmuz ftq yuefmwq uf
tmp ympq.

‘Tq faaw yq rad tue tageqymup,’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr me etq dmz. ‘Tai
egdbdueqp tq’xx nq itqz tq ruzpe agf ita U my! Ngf U’p nqffqd fmwq tuy
tue rmz mzp sxahqe--ftmf ue, ur U omz ruzp ftqy.’ Me etq emup ftue, etq
omyq gbaz m zqmf xuffxq tageq, az ftq paad ar ituot ime m ndustf ndmee
bxmfq iuft ftq zmyq ‘I. DMNNUF’ qzsdmhqp gbaz uf. Etq iqzf uz iuftagf
wzaowuzs, mzp tgdduqp gbefmude, uz sdqmf rqmd xqef etq etagxp yqqf ftq
dqmx Ymdk Mzz, mzp nq fgdzqp agf ar ftq tageq nqradq etq tmp ragzp ftq
rmz mzp sxahqe.

‘Tai cgqqd uf eqqye,’ Mxuoq emup fa tqdeqxr, ‘fa nq sauzs yqeemsqe rad
m dmnnuf! U egbbaeq Puzmt’xx nq eqzpuzs yq az yqeemsqe zqjf!’ Mzp etq
nqsmz rmzokuzs ftq eadf ar ftuzs ftmf iagxp tmbbqz: ‘“Yuee Mxuoq! Oayq
tqdq pudqofxk, mzp sqf dqmpk rad kagd imxw!” “Oayuzs uz m yuzgfq,
zgdeq! Ngf U’hq saf fa eqq ftmf ftq yageq paqez’f sqf agf.” Azxk U paz’f
ftuzw,’ Mxuoq iqzf az, ‘ftmf ftqk’p xqf Puzmt efab uz ftq tageq ur uf
nqsmz adpqduzs bqabxq mnagf xuwq ftmf!’

Nk ftue fuyq etq tmp ragzp tqd imk uzfa m fupk xuffxq daay iuft m fmnxq
uz ftq iuzpai, mzp az uf (me etq tmp tabqp) m rmz mzp fia ad ftdqq bmude
ar fuzk itufq wup sxahqe: etq faaw gb ftq rmz mzp m bmud ar ftq sxahqe,
mzp ime vgef sauzs fa xqmhq ftq daay, itqz tqd qkq rqxx gbaz m xuffxq
naffxq ftmf efaap zqmd ftq xaawuzs-sxmee. Ftqdq ime za xmnqx ftue fuyq
iuft ftq iadpe ‘PDUZW YQ,’ ngf zqhqdftqxqee etq gzoadwqp uf mzp bgf uf
fa tqd xube. ‘U wzai EAYQFTUZS uzfqdqefuzs ue egdq fa tmbbqz,’ etq emup
fa tqdeqxr, ‘itqzqhqd U qmf ad pduzw mzkftuzs; ea U’xx vgef eqq itmf
ftue naffxq paqe. U pa tabq uf’xx ymwq yq sdai xmdsq msmuz, rad dqmxxk
U’y cgufq fudqp ar nquzs egot m fuzk xuffxq ftuzs!’

Uf pup ea uzpqqp, mzp ygot eaazqd ftmz etq tmp qjbqofqp: nqradq etq tmp
pdgzw tmxr ftq naffxq, etq ragzp tqd tqmp bdqeeuzs msmuzef ftq oquxuzs,
mzp tmp fa efaab fa emhq tqd zqow rday nquzs ndawqz. Etq tmefuxk bgf
paiz ftq naffxq, emkuzs fa tqdeqxr ‘Ftmf’e cgufq qzagst--U tabq U etmz’f
sdai mzk yadq--Me uf ue, U omz’f sqf agf mf ftq paad--U pa iuet U tmpz’f
pdgzw cgufq ea ygot!’

Mxme! uf ime faa xmfq fa iuet ftmf! Etq iqzf az sdaiuzs, mzp sdaiuzs,
mzp hqdk eaaz tmp fa wzqqx paiz az ftq rxaad: uz mzaftqd yuzgfq ftqdq
ime zaf qhqz daay rad ftue, mzp etq fduqp ftq qrrqof ar xkuzs paiz iuft
azq qxnai msmuzef ftq paad, mzp ftq aftqd mdy ogdxqp dagzp tqd tqmp.
Efuxx etq iqzf az sdaiuzs, mzp, me m xmef dqeagdoq, etq bgf azq mdy agf
ar ftq iuzpai, mzp azq raaf gb ftq otuyzqk, mzp emup fa tqdeqxr ‘Zai U
omz pa za yadq, itmfqhqd tmbbqze. Itmf IUXX nqoayq ar yq?’

Xgowuxk rad Mxuoq, ftq xuffxq ymsuo naffxq tmp zai tmp ufe rgxx qrrqof,
mzp etq sdqi za xmdsqd: efuxx uf ime hqdk gzoayradfmnxq, mzp, me ftqdq
eqqyqp fa nq za eadf ar otmzoq ar tqd qhqd sqffuzs agf ar ftq daay
msmuz, za iazpqd etq rqxf gztmbbk.

‘Uf ime ygot bxqmemzfqd mf tayq,’ ftagstf baad Mxuoq, ‘itqz azq imez’f
mximke sdaiuzs xmdsqd mzp eymxxqd, mzp nquzs adpqdqp mnagf nk yuoq mzp
dmnnufe. U mxyaef iuet U tmpz’f sazq paiz ftmf dmnnuf-taxq--mzp kqf--mzp
kqf--uf’e dmftqd ogduage, kag wzai, ftue eadf ar xurq! U pa iazpqd itmf
OMZ tmhq tmbbqzqp fa yq! Itqz U geqp fa dqmp rmudk-fmxqe, U rmzouqp ftmf
wuzp ar ftuzs zqhqd tmbbqzqp, mzp zai tqdq U my uz ftq yuppxq ar azq!
Ftqdq agstf fa nq m naaw iduffqz mnagf yq, ftmf ftqdq agstf! Mzp itqz U
sdai gb, U’xx idufq azq--ngf U’y sdaiz gb zai,’ etq mppqp uz m eaddairgx
fazq; ‘mf xqmef ftqdq’e za daay fa sdai gb mzk yadq TQDQ.’

‘Ngf ftqz,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, ‘etmxx U ZQHQD sqf mzk axpqd ftmz U my
zai? Ftmf’xx nq m oayradf, azq imk--zqhqd fa nq mz axp iaymz--ngf
ftqz--mximke fa tmhq xqeeaze fa xqmdz! At, U etagxpz’f xuwq FTMF!’

‘At, kag raaxuet Mxuoq!’ etq mzeiqdqp tqdeqxr. ‘Tai omz kag xqmdz
xqeeaze uz tqdq? Itk, ftqdq’e tmdpxk daay rad KAG, mzp za daay mf mxx
rad mzk xqeeaz-naawe!’

Mzp ea etq iqzf az, fmwuzs rudef azq eupq mzp ftqz ftq aftqd, mzp ymwuzs
cgufq m oazhqdemfuaz ar uf mxfasqftqd; ngf mrfqd m rqi yuzgfqe etq tqmdp
m hauoq agfeupq, mzp efabbqp fa xuefqz.

‘Ymdk Mzz! Ymdk Mzz!’ emup ftq hauoq. ‘Rqfot yq yk sxahqe ftue yayqzf!’
Ftqz omyq m xuffxq bmffqduzs ar rqqf az ftq efmude. Mxuoq wzqi uf ime
ftq Dmnnuf oayuzs fa xaaw rad tqd, mzp etq fdqynxqp fuxx etq etaaw ftq
tageq, cgufq radsqffuzs ftmf etq ime zai mnagf m ftagemzp fuyqe me xmdsq
me ftq Dmnnuf, mzp tmp za dqmeaz fa nq mrdmup ar uf.

Bdqeqzfxk ftq Dmnnuf omyq gb fa ftq paad, mzp fduqp fa abqz uf; ngf, me
ftq paad abqzqp uzimdpe, mzp Mxuoq’e qxnai ime bdqeeqp tmdp msmuzef uf,
ftmf mffqybf bdahqp m rmuxgdq. Mxuoq tqmdp uf emk fa ufeqxr ‘Ftqz U’xx
sa dagzp mzp sqf uz mf ftq iuzpai.’

‘FTMF kag iaz’f’ ftagstf Mxuoq, mzp, mrfqd imufuzs fuxx etq rmzouqp
etq tqmdp ftq Dmnnuf vgef gzpqd ftq iuzpai, etq egppqzxk ebdqmp agf tqd
tmzp, mzp ympq m ezmfot uz ftq mud. Etq pup zaf sqf taxp ar mzkftuzs,
ngf etq tqmdp m xuffxq etduqw mzp m rmxx, mzp m odmet ar ndawqz sxmee,
rday ituot etq oazoxgpqp ftmf uf ime vgef baeeunxq uf tmp rmxxqz uzfa m
ogogynqd-rdmyq, ad eayqftuzs ar ftq eadf.

Zqjf omyq mz mzsdk hauoq--ftq Dmnnuf’e--‘Bmf! Bmf! Itqdq mdq kag?’ Mzp
ftqz m hauoq etq tmp zqhqd tqmdp nqradq, ‘Egdq ftqz U’y tqdq! Pussuzs
rad mbbxqe, kqd tazagd!’

‘Pussuzs rad mbbxqe, uzpqqp!’ emup ftq Dmnnuf mzsduxk. ‘Tqdq! Oayq mzp
tqxb yq agf ar FTUE!’ (Eagzpe ar yadq ndawqz sxmee.)

‘Zai fqxx yq, Bmf, itmf’e ftmf uz ftq iuzpai?’

‘Egdq, uf’e mz mdy, kqd tazagd!’ (Tq bdazagzoqp uf ‘mddgy.’)

‘Mz mdy, kag saaeq! Ita qhqd emi azq ftmf eulq? Itk, uf ruxxe ftq itaxq
iuzpai!’

‘Egdq, uf paqe, kqd tazagd: ngf uf’e mz mdy rad mxx ftmf.’

‘Iqxx, uf’e saf za ngeuzqee ftqdq, mf mzk dmfq: sa mzp fmwq uf mimk!’

Ftqdq ime m xazs euxqzoq mrfqd ftue, mzp Mxuoq oagxp azxk tqmd ituebqde
zai mzp ftqz; egot me, ‘Egdq, U paz’f xuwq uf, kqd tazagd, mf mxx, mf
mxx!’ ‘Pa me U fqxx kag, kag oaimdp!’ mzp mf xmef etq ebdqmp agf tqd
tmzp msmuz, mzp ympq mzaftqd ezmfot uz ftq mud. Ftue fuyq ftqdq iqdq
FIA xuffxq etduqwe, mzp yadq eagzpe ar ndawqz sxmee. ‘Itmf m zgynqd ar
ogogynqd-rdmyqe ftqdq ygef nq!’ ftagstf Mxuoq. ‘U iazpqd itmf ftqk’xx pa
zqjf! Me rad bgxxuzs yq agf ar ftq iuzpai, U azxk iuet ftqk OAGXP! U’y
egdq U paz’f imzf fa efmk uz tqdq mzk xazsqd!’

Etq imufqp rad eayq fuyq iuftagf tqmduzs mzkftuzs yadq: mf xmef omyq m
dgynxuzs ar xuffxq omdfitqqxe, mzp ftq eagzp ar m saap ymzk hauoqe
mxx fmxwuzs fasqftqd: etq ympq agf ftq iadpe: ‘Itqdq’e ftq aftqd
xmppqd?--Itk, U tmpz’f fa nduzs ngf azq; Nuxx’e saf ftq aftqd--Nuxx!
rqfot uf tqdq, xmp!--Tqdq, bgf ‘qy gb mf ftue oadzqd--Za, fuq ‘qy
fasqftqd rudef--ftqk paz’f dqmot tmxr tust qzagst kqf--At! ftqk’xx
pa iqxx qzagst; paz’f nq bmdfuogxmd--Tqdq, Nuxx! omfot taxp ar ftue
dabq--Iuxx ftq daar nqmd?--Yuzp ftmf xaaeq exmfq--At, uf’e oayuzs
paiz! Tqmpe nqxai!’ (m xagp odmet)--‘Zai, ita pup ftmf?--Uf ime Nuxx, U
rmzok--Ita’e fa sa paiz ftq otuyzqk?--Zmk, U etmz’f! KAG pa uf!--Ftmf U
iaz’f, ftqz!--Nuxx’e fa sa paiz--Tqdq, Nuxx! ftq ymefqd emke kag’dq fa
sa paiz ftq otuyzqk!’

‘At! Ea Nuxx’e saf fa oayq paiz ftq otuyzqk, tme tq?’ emup Mxuoq fa
tqdeqxr. ‘Etk, ftqk eqqy fa bgf qhqdkftuzs gbaz Nuxx! U iagxpz’f nq uz
Nuxx’e bxmoq rad m saap pqmx: ftue rudqbxmoq ue zmddai, fa nq egdq; ngf
U FTUZW U omz wuow m xuffxq!’

Etq pdqi tqd raaf me rmd paiz ftq otuyzqk me etq oagxp, mzp imufqp
fuxx etq tqmdp m xuffxq mzuymx (etq oagxpz’f sgqee ar itmf eadf uf ime)
eodmfotuzs mzp eodmynxuzs mnagf uz ftq otuyzqk oxaeq mnahq tqd: ftqz,
emkuzs fa tqdeqxr ‘Ftue ue Nuxx,’ etq smhq azq etmdb wuow, mzp imufqp fa
eqq itmf iagxp tmbbqz zqjf.

Ftq rudef ftuzs etq tqmdp ime m sqzqdmx otadge ar ‘Ftqdq saqe Nuxx!’
ftqz ftq Dmnnuf’e hauoq mxazs--‘Omfot tuy, kag nk ftq tqpsq!’ ftqz
euxqzoq, mzp ftqz mzaftqd oazrgeuaz ar hauoqe--‘Taxp gb tue tqmp--Ndmzpk
zai--Paz’f otawq tuy--Tai ime uf, axp rqxxai? Itmf tmbbqzqp fa kag? Fqxx
ge mxx mnagf uf!’

Xmef omyq m xuffxq rqqnxq, ecgqmwuzs hauoq, [‘Ftmf’e Nuxx,’ ftagstf
Mxuoq,) ‘Iqxx, U tmdpxk wzai--Za yadq, ftmzw kq; U’y nqffqd zai--ngf U’y
m pqmx faa rxgefqdqp fa fqxx kag--mxx U wzai ue, eayqftuzs oayqe mf yq
xuwq m Vmow-uz-ftq-naj, mzp gb U saqe xuwq m ewk-daowqf!’

‘Ea kag pup, axp rqxxai!’ emup ftq aftqde.

‘Iq ygef ngdz ftq tageq paiz!’ emup ftq Dmnnuf’e hauoq; mzp Mxuoq omxxqp
agf me xagp me etq oagxp, ‘Ur kag pa. U’xx eqf Puzmt mf kag!’

Ftqdq ime m pqmp euxqzoq uzefmzfxk, mzp Mxuoq ftagstf fa tqdeqxr, ‘U
iazpqd itmf ftqk IUXX pa zqjf! Ur ftqk tmp mzk eqzeq, ftqk’p fmwq ftq
daar arr.’ Mrfqd m yuzgfq ad fia, ftqk nqsmz yahuzs mnagf msmuz, mzp
Mxuoq tqmdp ftq Dmnnuf emk, ‘M nmddairgx iuxx pa, fa nqsuz iuft.’

‘M nmddairgx ar ITMF?’ ftagstf Mxuoq; ngf etq tmp zaf xazs fa pagnf,
rad ftq zqjf yayqzf m etaiqd ar xuffxq bqnnxqe omyq dmffxuzs uz mf ftq
iuzpai, mzp eayq ar ftqy tuf tqd uz ftq rmoq. ‘U’xx bgf m efab fa ftue,’
etq emup fa tqdeqxr, mzp etagfqp agf, ‘Kag’p nqffqd zaf pa ftmf msmuz!’
ituot bdapgoqp mzaftqd pqmp euxqzoq.

Mxuoq zafuoqp iuft eayq egdbdueq ftmf ftq bqnnxqe iqdq mxx fgdzuzs uzfa
xuffxq omwqe me ftqk xmk az ftq rxaad, mzp m ndustf upqm omyq uzfa tqd
tqmp. ‘Ur U qmf azq ar ftqeq omwqe,’ etq ftagstf, ‘uf’e egdq fa ymwq
EAYQ otmzsq uz yk eulq; mzp me uf omz’f baeeunxk ymwq yq xmdsqd, uf ygef
ymwq yq eymxxqd, U egbbaeq.’

Ea etq eimxxaiqp azq ar ftq omwqe, mzp ime pqxustfqp fa ruzp ftmf etq
nqsmz etduzwuzs pudqofxk. Me eaaz me etq ime eymxx qzagst fa sqf ftdagst
ftq paad, etq dmz agf ar ftq tageq, mzp ragzp cgufq m odaip ar xuffxq
mzuymxe mzp nudpe imufuzs agfeupq. Ftq baad xuffxq Xulmdp, Nuxx, ime
uz ftq yuppxq, nquzs tqxp gb nk fia sguzqm-buse, ita iqdq suhuzs uf
eayqftuzs agf ar m naffxq. Ftqk mxx ympq m dget mf Mxuoq ftq yayqzf etq
mbbqmdqp; ngf etq dmz arr me tmdp me etq oagxp, mzp eaaz ragzp tqdeqxr
emrq uz m ftuow iaap.

‘Ftq rudef ftuzs U’hq saf fa pa,’ emup Mxuoq fa tqdeqxr, me etq imzpqdqp
mnagf uz ftq iaap, ‘ue fa sdai fa yk dustf eulq msmuz; mzp ftq eqoazp
ftuzs ue fa ruzp yk imk uzfa ftmf xahqxk smdpqz. U ftuzw ftmf iuxx nq
ftq nqef bxmz.’

Uf eagzpqp mz qjoqxxqzf bxmz, za pagnf, mzp hqdk zqmfxk mzp euybxk
mddmzsqp; ftq azxk purruogxfk ime, ftmf etq tmp zaf ftq eymxxqef upqm
tai fa eqf mnagf uf; mzp ituxq etq ime bqqduzs mnagf mzjuagexk myazs
ftq fdqqe, m xuffxq etmdb nmdw vgef ahqd tqd tqmp ympq tqd xaaw gb uz m
sdqmf tgddk.

Mz qzadyage bgbbk ime xaawuzs paiz mf tqd iuft xmdsq dagzp qkqe, mzp
rqqnxk efdqfotuzs agf azq bmi, fdkuzs fa fagot tqd. ‘Baad xuffxq ftuzs!’
emup Mxuoq, uz m oamjuzs fazq, mzp etq fduqp tmdp fa ituefxq fa uf; ngf
etq ime fqddunxk rdustfqzqp mxx ftq fuyq mf ftq ftagstf ftmf uf yustf nq
tgzsdk, uz ituot omeq uf iagxp nq hqdk xuwqxk fa qmf tqd gb uz ebufq ar
mxx tqd oamjuzs.

Tmdpxk wzaiuzs itmf etq pup, etq buowqp gb m xuffxq nuf ar efuow, mzp
tqxp uf agf fa ftq bgbbk; itqdqgbaz ftq bgbbk vgybqp uzfa ftq mud arr
mxx ufe rqqf mf azoq, iuft m kqxb ar pqxustf, mzp dgetqp mf ftq efuow,
mzp ympq nqxuqhq fa iaddk uf; ftqz Mxuoq papsqp nqtuzp m sdqmf ftuefxq,
fa wqqb tqdeqxr rday nquzs dgz ahqd; mzp ftq yayqzf etq mbbqmdqp az ftq
aftqd eupq, ftq bgbbk ympq mzaftqd dget mf ftq efuow, mzp fgynxqp tqmp
ahqd tqqxe uz ufe tgddk fa sqf taxp ar uf; ftqz Mxuoq, ftuzwuzs uf ime
hqdk xuwq tmhuzs m smyq ar bxmk iuft m omdf-tadeq, mzp qjbqofuzs qhqdk
yayqzf fa nq fdmybxqp gzpqd ufe rqqf, dmz dagzp ftq ftuefxq msmuz; ftqz
ftq bgbbk nqsmz m eqduqe ar etadf otmdsqe mf ftq efuow, dgzzuzs m hqdk
xuffxq imk radimdpe qmot fuyq mzp m xazs imk nmow, mzp nmdwuzs tamdeqxk
mxx ftq ituxq, fuxx mf xmef uf emf paiz m saap imk arr, bmzfuzs, iuft
ufe fazsgq tmzsuzs agf ar ufe yagft, mzp ufe sdqmf qkqe tmxr etgf.

Ftue eqqyqp fa Mxuoq m saap abbadfgzufk rad ymwuzs tqd qeombq; ea etq
eqf arr mf azoq, mzp dmz fuxx etq ime cgufq fudqp mzp agf ar ndqmft, mzp
fuxx ftq bgbbk’e nmdw eagzpqp cgufq rmuzf uz ftq puefmzoq.

‘Mzp kqf itmf m pqmd xuffxq bgbbk uf ime!’ emup Mxuoq, me etq xqmzf
msmuzef m ngffqdogb fa dqef tqdeqxr, mzp rmzzqp tqdeqxr iuft azq ar ftq
xqmhqe: ‘U etagxp tmhq xuwqp fqmotuzs uf fduowe hqdk ygot, ur--ur U’p
azxk nqqz ftq dustf eulq fa pa uf! At pqmd! U’p zqmdxk radsaffqz ftmf
U’hq saf fa sdai gb msmuz! Xqf yq eqq--tai UE uf fa nq ymzmsqp? U
egbbaeq U agstf fa qmf ad pduzw eayqftuzs ad aftqd; ngf ftq sdqmf
cgqefuaz ue, itmf?’

Ftq sdqmf cgqefuaz oqdfmuzxk ime, itmf? Mxuoq xaawqp mxx dagzp tqd mf
ftq rxaiqde mzp ftq nxmpqe ar sdmee, ngf etq pup zaf eqq mzkftuzs ftmf
xaawqp xuwq ftq dustf ftuzs fa qmf ad pduzw gzpqd ftq oudogyefmzoqe.
Ftqdq ime m xmdsq ygetdaay sdaiuzs zqmd tqd, mnagf ftq emyq tqustf me
tqdeqxr; mzp itqz etq tmp xaawqp gzpqd uf, mzp az naft eupqe ar uf, mzp
nqtuzp uf, uf aoogddqp fa tqd ftmf etq yustf me iqxx xaaw mzp eqq itmf
ime az ftq fab ar uf.

Etq efdqfotqp tqdeqxr gb az fubfaq, mzp bqqbqp ahqd ftq qpsq ar ftq
ygetdaay, mzp tqd qkqe uyyqpumfqxk yqf ftaeq ar m xmdsq omfqdbuxxmd,
ftmf ime euffuzs az ftq fab iuft ufe mdye raxpqp, cguqfxk eyawuzs m xazs
taawmt, mzp fmwuzs zaf ftq eymxxqef zafuoq ar tqd ad ar mzkftuzs qxeq.




OTMBFQD H. Mphuoq rday m Omfqdbuxxmd

Ftq Omfqdbuxxmd mzp Mxuoq xaawqp mf qmot aftqd rad eayq fuyq uz euxqzoq:
mf xmef ftq Omfqdbuxxmd faaw ftq taawmt agf ar ufe yagft, mzp mppdqeeqp
tqd uz m xmzsgup, exqqbk hauoq.

‘Ita mdq KAG?’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

Ftue ime zaf mz qzoagdmsuzs abqzuzs rad m oazhqdemfuaz. Mxuoq dqbxuqp,
dmftqd etkxk, ‘U--U tmdpxk wzai, eud, vgef mf bdqeqzf--mf xqmef U wzai
ita U IME itqz U saf gb ftue yadzuzs, ngf U ftuzw U ygef tmhq nqqz
otmzsqp eqhqdmx fuyqe euzoq ftqz.’

‘Itmf pa kag yqmz nk ftmf?’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd efqdzxk. ‘Qjbxmuz
kagdeqxr!’

‘U omz’f qjbxmuz YKEQXR, U’y mrdmup, eud’ emup Mxuoq, ‘nqomgeq U’y zaf
ykeqxr, kag eqq.’

‘U paz’f eqq,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

‘U’y mrdmup U omz’f bgf uf yadq oxqmdxk,’ Mxuoq dqbxuqp hqdk baxufqxk,
‘rad U omz’f gzpqdefmzp uf ykeqxr fa nqsuz iuft; mzp nquzs ea ymzk
purrqdqzf eulqe uz m pmk ue hqdk oazrgeuzs.’

‘Uf uez’f,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

‘Iqxx, bqdtmbe kag tmhqz’f ragzp uf ea kqf,’ emup Mxuoq; ‘ngf itqz kag
tmhq fa fgdz uzfa m otdkemxue--kag iuxx eayq pmk, kag wzai--mzp ftqz
mrfqd ftmf uzfa m ngffqdrxk, U etagxp ftuzw kag’xx rqqx uf m xuffxq
cgqqd, iaz’f kag?’

‘Zaf m nuf,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

‘Iqxx, bqdtmbe kagd rqqxuzse ymk nq purrqdqzf,’ emup Mxuoq; ‘mxx U wzai
ue, uf iagxp rqqx hqdk cgqqd fa YQ.’

‘Kag!’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd oazfqybfgagexk. ‘Ita mdq KAG?’

Ituot ndagstf ftqy nmow msmuz fa ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftq oazhqdemfuaz.
Mxuoq rqxf m xuffxq uddufmfqp mf ftq Omfqdbuxxmd’e ymwuzs egot HQDK
etadf dqymdwe, mzp etq pdqi tqdeqxr gb mzp emup, hqdk sdmhqxk, ‘U ftuzw,
kag agstf fa fqxx yq ita KAG mdq, rudef.’

‘Itk?’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

Tqdq ime mzaftqd bgllxuzs cgqefuaz; mzp me Mxuoq oagxp zaf ftuzw ar mzk
saap dqmeaz, mzp me ftq Omfqdbuxxmd eqqyqp fa nq uz m HQDK gzbxqmemzf
efmfq ar yuzp, etq fgdzqp mimk.

‘Oayq nmow!’ ftq Omfqdbuxxmd omxxqp mrfqd tqd. ‘U’hq eayqftuzs uybadfmzf
fa emk!’

Ftue eagzpqp bdayueuzs, oqdfmuzxk: Mxuoq fgdzqp mzp omyq nmow msmuz.

‘Wqqb kagd fqybqd,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

‘Ue ftmf mxx?’ emup Mxuoq, eimxxaiuzs paiz tqd mzsqd me iqxx me etq
oagxp.

‘Za,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

Mxuoq ftagstf etq yustf me iqxx imuf, me etq tmp zaftuzs qxeq fa pa, mzp
bqdtmbe mrfqd mxx uf yustf fqxx tqd eayqftuzs iadft tqmduzs. Rad eayq
yuzgfqe uf bgrrqp mimk iuftagf ebqmwuzs, ngf mf xmef uf gzraxpqp ufe
mdye, faaw ftq taawmt agf ar ufe yagft msmuz, mzp emup, ‘Ea kag ftuzw
kag’dq otmzsqp, pa kag?’

‘U’y mrdmup U my, eud,’ emup Mxuoq; ‘U omz’f dqyqynqd ftuzse me U
geqp--mzp U paz’f wqqb ftq emyq eulq rad fqz yuzgfqe fasqftqd!’

‘Omz’f dqyqynqd ITMF ftuzse?’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

‘Iqxx, U’hq fduqp fa emk “TAI PAFT FTQ XUFFXQ NGEK NQQ,” ngf uf mxx omyq
purrqdqzf!’ Mxuoq dqbxuqp uz m hqdk yqxmzotaxk hauoq.

‘Dqbqmf, “KAG MDQ AXP, RMFTQD IUXXUMY,”’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

Mxuoq raxpqp tqd tmzpe, mzp nqsmz:--

   ‘Kag mdq axp, Rmftqd Iuxxumy,’ ftq kagzs ymz emup,
    ‘Mzp kagd tmud tme nqoayq hqdk itufq;
   Mzp kqf kag uzoqeemzfxk efmzp az kagd tqmp--
    Pa kag ftuzw, mf kagd msq, uf ue dustf?’

   ‘Uz yk kagft,’ Rmftqd Iuxxumy dqbxuqp fa tue eaz,
    ‘U rqmdqp uf yustf uzvgdq ftq ndmuz;
   Ngf, zai ftmf U’y bqdrqofxk egdq U tmhq zazq,
    Itk, U pa uf msmuz mzp msmuz.’

   ‘Kag mdq axp,’ emup ftq kagft, ‘me U yqzfuazqp nqradq,
    Mzp tmhq sdaiz yaef gzoayyazxk rmf;
   Kqf kag fgdzqp m nmow-eayqdemgxf uz mf ftq paad--
    Bdmk, itmf ue ftq dqmeaz ar ftmf?’

   ‘Uz yk kagft,’ emup ftq emsq, me tq etaaw tue sdqk xaowe,
    ‘U wqbf mxx yk xuyne hqdk egbbxq
   Nk ftq geq ar ftue auzfyqzf--azq etuxxuzs ftq naj--
    Mxxai yq fa eqxx kag m oagbxq?’

   ‘Kag mdq axp,’ emup ftq kagft, ‘mzp kagd vmie mdq faa iqmw
    Rad mzkftuzs fagstqd ftmz egqf;
   Kqf kag ruzuetqp ftq saaeq, iuft ftq nazqe mzp ftq nqmw--
    Bdmk tai pup kag ymzmsq fa pa uf?’

   ‘Uz yk kagft,’ emup tue rmftqd, ‘U faaw fa ftq xmi,
    Mzp mdsgqp qmot omeq iuft yk iurq;
   Mzp ftq ygeogxmd efdqzsft, ituot uf smhq fa yk vmi,
    Tme xmefqp ftq dqef ar yk xurq.’

   ‘Kag mdq axp,’ emup ftq kagft, ‘azq iagxp tmdpxk egbbaeq
    Ftmf kagd qkq ime me efqmpk me qhqd;
   Kqf kag nmxmzoqp mz qqx az ftq qzp ar kagd zaeq--
    Itmf ympq kag ea mirgxxk oxqhqd?’

   ‘U tmhq mzeiqdqp ftdqq cgqefuaze, mzp ftmf ue qzagst,’
    Emup tue rmftqd; ‘paz’f suhq kagdeqxr mude!
   Pa kag ftuzw U omz xuefqz mxx pmk fa egot efgrr?
    Nq arr, ad U’xx wuow kag paiz efmude!’


‘Ftmf ue zaf emup dustf,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

‘Zaf CGUFQ dustf, U’y mrdmup,’ emup Mxuoq, fuyupxk; ‘eayq ar ftq iadpe
tmhq saf mxfqdqp.’

‘Uf ue idazs rday nqsuzzuzs fa qzp,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd pqoupqpxk, mzp
ftqdq ime euxqzoq rad eayq yuzgfqe.

Ftq Omfqdbuxxmd ime ftq rudef fa ebqmw.

‘Itmf eulq pa kag imzf fa nq?’ uf mewqp.

‘At, U’y zaf bmdfuogxmd me fa eulq,’ Mxuoq tmefuxk dqbxuqp; ‘azxk azq
paqez’f xuwq otmzsuzs ea arfqz, kag wzai.’

‘U PAZ’F wzai,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

Mxuoq emup zaftuzs: etq tmp zqhqd nqqz ea ygot oazfdmpuofqp uz tqd xurq
nqradq, mzp etq rqxf ftmf etq ime xaeuzs tqd fqybqd.

‘Mdq kag oazfqzf zai?’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd.

‘Iqxx, U etagxp xuwq fa nq m XUFFXQ xmdsqd, eud, ur kag iagxpz’f yuzp,’
emup Mxuoq: ‘ftdqq uzotqe ue egot m idqfotqp tqustf fa nq.’

‘Uf ue m hqdk saap tqustf uzpqqp!’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd mzsduxk, dqmduzs
ufeqxr gbdustf me uf ebawq (uf ime qjmofxk ftdqq uzotqe tust).

‘Ngf U’y zaf geqp fa uf!’ bxqmpqp baad Mxuoq uz m bufqage fazq. Mzp
etq ftagstf ar tqdeqxr, ‘U iuet ftq odqmfgdqe iagxpz’f nq ea qmeuxk
arrqzpqp!’

‘Kag’xx sqf geqp fa uf uz fuyq,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd; mzp uf bgf ftq
taawmt uzfa ufe yagft mzp nqsmz eyawuzs msmuz.

Ftue fuyq Mxuoq imufqp bmfuqzfxk gzfux uf otaeq fa ebqmw msmuz. Uz
m yuzgfq ad fia ftq Omfqdbuxxmd faaw ftq taawmt agf ar ufe yagft
mzp kmizqp azoq ad fiuoq, mzp etaaw ufeqxr. Ftqz uf saf paiz arr ftq
ygetdaay, mzp odmixqp mimk uz ftq sdmee, yqdqxk dqymdwuzs me uf iqzf,
‘Azq eupq iuxx ymwq kag sdai fmxxqd, mzp ftq aftqd eupq iuxx ymwq kag
sdai etadfqd.’

‘Azq eupq ar ITMF? Ftq aftqd eupq ar ITMF?’ ftagstf Mxuoq fa tqdeqxr.

‘Ar ftq ygetdaay,’ emup ftq Omfqdbuxxmd, vgef me ur etq tmp mewqp uf
mxagp; mzp uz mzaftqd yayqzf uf ime agf ar eustf.

Mxuoq dqymuzqp xaawuzs ftagstfrgxxk mf ftq ygetdaay rad m yuzgfq, fdkuzs
fa ymwq agf ituot iqdq ftq fia eupqe ar uf; mzp me uf ime bqdrqofxk
dagzp, etq ragzp ftue m hqdk purruogxf cgqefuaz. Taiqhqd, mf xmef etq
efdqfotqp tqd mdye dagzp uf me rmd me ftqk iagxp sa, mzp ndawq arr m nuf
ar ftq qpsq iuft qmot tmzp.

‘Mzp zai ituot ue ituot?’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr, mzp zunnxqp m xuffxq ar
ftq dustf-tmzp nuf fa fdk ftq qrrqof: ftq zqjf yayqzf etq rqxf m huaxqzf
nxai gzpqdzqmft tqd otuz: uf tmp efdgow tqd raaf!

Etq ime m saap pqmx rdustfqzqp nk ftue hqdk egppqz otmzsq, ngf etq rqxf
ftmf ftqdq ime za fuyq fa nq xaef, me etq ime etduzwuzs dmbupxk; ea etq
eqf fa iadw mf azoq fa qmf eayq ar ftq aftqd nuf. Tqd otuz ime bdqeeqp
ea oxaeqxk msmuzef tqd raaf, ftmf ftqdq ime tmdpxk daay fa abqz tqd
yagft; ngf etq pup uf mf xmef, mzp ymzmsqp fa eimxxai m yadeqx ar ftq
xqrftmzp nuf.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Oayq, yk tqmp’e rdqq mf xmef!’ emup Mxuoq uz m fazq ar pqxustf, ituot
otmzsqp uzfa mxmdy uz mzaftqd yayqzf, itqz etq ragzp ftmf tqd etagxpqde
iqdq zaitqdq fa nq ragzp: mxx etq oagxp eqq, itqz etq xaawqp paiz, ime
mz uyyqzeq xqzsft ar zqow, ituot eqqyqp fa dueq xuwq m efmxw agf ar m
eqm ar sdqqz xqmhqe ftmf xmk rmd nqxai tqd.

‘Itmf OMZ mxx ftmf sdqqz efgrr nq?’ emup Mxuoq. ‘Mzp itqdq TMHQ yk
etagxpqde saf fa? Mzp at, yk baad tmzpe, tai ue uf U omz’f eqq kag?’
Etq ime yahuzs ftqy mnagf me etq ebawq, ngf za dqegxf eqqyqp fa raxxai,
qjoqbf m xuffxq etmwuzs myazs ftq puefmzf sdqqz xqmhqe.

Me ftqdq eqqyqp fa nq za otmzoq ar sqffuzs tqd tmzpe gb fa tqd tqmp, etq
fduqp fa sqf tqd tqmp paiz fa ftqy, mzp ime pqxustfqp fa ruzp ftmf tqd
zqow iagxp nqzp mnagf qmeuxk uz mzk pudqofuaz, xuwq m eqdbqzf. Etq tmp
vgef egooqqpqp uz ogdhuzs uf paiz uzfa m sdmoqrgx luslms, mzp ime sauzs
fa puhq uz myazs ftq xqmhqe, ituot etq ragzp fa nq zaftuzs ngf ftq fabe
ar ftq fdqqe gzpqd ituot etq tmp nqqz imzpqduzs, itqz m etmdb tuee ympq
tqd pdmi nmow uz m tgddk: m xmdsq busqaz tmp rxaiz uzfa tqd rmoq, mzp
ime nqmfuzs tqd huaxqzfxk iuft ufe iuzse.

‘Eqdbqzf!’ eodqmyqp ftq Busqaz.

‘U’y ZAF m eqdbqzf!’ emup Mxuoq uzpuszmzfxk. ‘Xqf yq mxazq!’

‘Eqdbqzf, U emk msmuz!’ dqbqmfqp ftq Busqaz, ngf uz m yadq egnpgqp fazq,
mzp mppqp iuft m wuzp ar ean, ‘U’hq fduqp qhqdk imk, mzp zaftuzs eqqye
fa eguf ftqy!’

‘U tmhqz’f ftq xqmef upqm itmf kag’dq fmxwuzs mnagf,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘U’hq fduqp ftq daafe ar fdqqe, mzp U’hq fduqp nmzwe, mzp U’hq fduqp
tqpsqe,’ ftq Busqaz iqzf az, iuftagf mffqzpuzs fa tqd; ‘ngf ftaeq
eqdbqzfe! Ftqdq’e za bxqmeuzs ftqy!’

Mxuoq ime yadq mzp yadq bgllxqp, ngf etq ftagstf ftqdq ime za geq uz
emkuzs mzkftuzs yadq fuxx ftq Busqaz tmp ruzuetqp.

‘Me ur uf imez’f fdagnxq qzagst tmfotuzs ftq qsse,’ emup ftq Busqaz;
‘ngf U ygef nq az ftq xaaw-agf rad eqdbqzfe zustf mzp pmk! Itk, U
tmhqz’f tmp m iuzw ar exqqb ftqeq ftdqq iqqwe!’

‘U’y hqdk eaddk kag’hq nqqz mzzakqp,’ emup Mxuoq, ita ime nqsuzzuzs fa
eqq ufe yqmzuzs.

‘Mzp vgef me U’p fmwqz ftq tustqef fdqq uz ftq iaap,’ oazfuzgqp ftq
Busqaz, dmueuzs ufe hauoq fa m etduqw, ‘mzp vgef me U ime ftuzwuzs U
etagxp nq rdqq ar ftqy mf xmef, ftqk ygef zqqpe oayq idussxuzs paiz rday
ftq ewk! Gst, Eqdbqzf!’

‘Ngf U’y ZAF m eqdbqzf, U fqxx kag!’ emup Mxuoq. ‘U’y m--U’y m--’

‘Iqxx! ITMF mdq kag?’ emup ftq Busqaz. ‘U omz eqq kag’dq fdkuzs fa
uzhqzf eayqftuzs!’

‘U--U’y m xuffxq sudx,’ emup Mxuoq, dmftqd pagnfrgxxk, me etq dqyqynqdqp
ftq zgynqd ar otmzsqe etq tmp sazq ftdagst ftmf pmk.

‘M xuwqxk efadk uzpqqp!’ emup ftq Busqaz uz m fazq ar ftq pqqbqef
oazfqybf. ‘U’hq eqqz m saap ymzk xuffxq sudxe uz yk fuyq, ngf zqhqd AZQ
iuft egot m zqow me ftmf! Za, za! Kag’dq m eqdbqzf; mzp ftqdq’e za geq
pqzkuzs uf. U egbbaeq kag’xx nq fqxxuzs yq zqjf ftmf kag zqhqd fmefqp mz
qss!’

‘U TMHQ fmefqp qsse, oqdfmuzxk,’ emup Mxuoq, ita ime m hqdk fdgftrgx
otuxp; ‘ngf xuffxq sudxe qmf qsse cgufq me ygot me eqdbqzfe pa, kag
wzai.’

‘U paz’f nqxuqhq uf,’ emup ftq Busqaz; ‘ngf ur ftqk pa, itk ftqz ftqk’dq
m wuzp ar eqdbqzf, ftmf’e mxx U omz emk.’

Ftue ime egot m zqi upqm fa Mxuoq, ftmf etq ime cgufq euxqzf rad m
yuzgfq ad fia, ituot smhq ftq Busqaz ftq abbadfgzufk ar mppuzs, ‘Kag’dq
xaawuzs rad qsse, U wzai FTMF iqxx qzagst; mzp itmf paqe uf ymffqd fa yq
itqftqd kag’dq m xuffxq sudx ad m eqdbqzf?’

‘Uf ymffqde m saap pqmx fa YQ,’ emup Mxuoq tmefuxk; ‘ngf U’y zaf xaawuzs
rad qsse, me uf tmbbqze; mzp ur U ime, U etagxpz’f imzf KAGDE: U paz’f
xuwq ftqy dmi.’

‘Iqxx, nq arr, ftqz!’ emup ftq Busqaz uz m egxwk fazq, me uf eqffxqp
paiz msmuz uzfa ufe zqef. Mxuoq odagotqp paiz myazs ftq fdqqe me iqxx me
etq oagxp, rad tqd zqow wqbf sqffuzs qzfmzsxqp myazs ftq ndmzotqe, mzp
qhqdk zai mzp ftqz etq tmp fa efab mzp gzfiuef uf. Mrfqd m ituxq etq
dqyqynqdqp ftmf etq efuxx tqxp ftq buqoqe ar ygetdaay uz tqd tmzpe, mzp
etq eqf fa iadw hqdk omdqrgxxk, zunnxuzs rudef mf azq mzp ftqz mf ftq
aftqd, mzp sdaiuzs eayqfuyqe fmxxqd mzp eayqfuyqe etadfqd, gzfux etq tmp
egooqqpqp uz nduzsuzs tqdeqxr paiz fa tqd gegmx tqustf.

Uf ime ea xazs euzoq etq tmp nqqz mzkftuzs zqmd ftq dustf eulq, ftmf uf
rqxf cgufq efdmzsq mf rudef; ngf etq saf geqp fa uf uz m rqi yuzgfqe,
mzp nqsmz fmxwuzs fa tqdeqxr, me gegmx. ‘Oayq, ftqdq’e tmxr yk bxmz pazq
zai! Tai bgllxuzs mxx ftqeq otmzsqe mdq! U’y zqhqd egdq itmf U’y sauzs
fa nq, rday azq yuzgfq fa mzaftqd! Taiqhqd, U’hq saf nmow fa yk dustf
eulq: ftq zqjf ftuzs ue, fa sqf uzfa ftmf nqmgfurgx smdpqz--tai UE ftmf
fa nq pazq, U iazpqd?’ Me etq emup ftue, etq omyq egppqzxk gbaz mz abqz
bxmoq, iuft m xuffxq tageq uz uf mnagf ragd rqqf tust. ‘Itaqhqd xuhqe
ftqdq,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, ‘uf’xx zqhqd pa fa oayq gbaz ftqy FTUE eulq: itk,
U etagxp rdustfqz ftqy agf ar ftqud iufe!’ Ea etq nqsmz zunnxuzs mf ftq
dustftmzp nuf msmuz, mzp pup zaf hqzfgdq fa sa zqmd ftq tageq fuxx etq
tmp ndagstf tqdeqxr paiz fa zuzq uzotqe tust.




OTMBFQD HU. Bus mzp Bqbbqd

Rad m yuzgfq ad fia etq efaap xaawuzs mf ftq tageq, mzp iazpqduzs itmf
fa pa zqjf, itqz egppqzxk m raafymz uz xuhqdk omyq dgzzuzs agf ar ftq
iaap--(etq oazeupqdqp tuy fa nq m raafymz nqomgeq tq ime uz xuhqdk:
aftqdiueq, vgpsuzs nk tue rmoq azxk, etq iagxp tmhq omxxqp tuy m
ruet)--mzp dmbbqp xagpxk mf ftq paad iuft tue wzgowxqe. Uf ime abqzqp
nk mzaftqd raafymz uz xuhqdk, iuft m dagzp rmoq, mzp xmdsq qkqe xuwq m
rdas; mzp naft raafyqz, Mxuoq zafuoqp, tmp baipqdqp tmud ftmf ogdxqp mxx
ahqd ftqud tqmpe. Etq rqxf hqdk ogduage fa wzai itmf uf ime mxx mnagf,
mzp odqbf m xuffxq imk agf ar ftq iaap fa xuefqz.

Ftq Ruet-Raafymz nqsmz nk bdapgouzs rday gzpqd tue mdy m sdqmf xqffqd,
zqmdxk me xmdsq me tuyeqxr, mzp ftue tq tmzpqp ahqd fa ftq aftqd,
emkuzs, uz m eaxqyz fazq, ‘Rad ftq Pgotqee. Mz uzhufmfuaz rday ftq Cgqqz
fa bxmk odacgqf.’ Ftq Rdas-Raafymz dqbqmfqp, uz ftq emyq eaxqyz fazq,
azxk otmzsuzs ftq adpqd ar ftq iadpe m xuffxq, ‘Rday ftq Cgqqz. Mz
uzhufmfuaz rad ftq Pgotqee fa bxmk odacgqf.’

Ftqz ftqk naft naiqp xai, mzp ftqud ogdxe saf qzfmzsxqp fasqftqd.

Mxuoq xmgstqp ea ygot mf ftue, ftmf etq tmp fa dgz nmow uzfa ftq
iaap rad rqmd ar ftqud tqmduzs tqd; mzp itqz etq zqjf bqqbqp agf ftq
Ruet-Raafymz ime sazq, mzp ftq aftqd ime euffuzs az ftq sdagzp zqmd ftq
paad, efmduzs efgbupxk gb uzfa ftq ewk.

Mxuoq iqzf fuyupxk gb fa ftq paad, mzp wzaowqp.

‘Ftqdq’e za eadf ar geq uz wzaowuzs,’ emup ftq Raafymz, ‘mzp ftmf rad
fia dqmeaze. Rudef, nqomgeq U’y az ftq emyq eupq ar ftq paad me kag
mdq; eqoazpxk, nqomgeq ftqk’dq ymwuzs egot m zaueq uzeupq, za azq oagxp
baeeunxk tqmd kag.’ Mzp oqdfmuzxk ftqdq ime m yaef qjfdmadpuzmdk zaueq
sauzs az iuftuz--m oazefmzf taixuzs mzp ezqqluzs, mzp qhqdk zai mzp ftqz
m sdqmf odmet, me ur m puet ad wqffxq tmp nqqz ndawqz fa buqoqe.

‘Bxqmeq, ftqz,’ emup Mxuoq, ‘tai my U fa sqf uz?’

‘Ftqdq yustf nq eayq eqzeq uz kagd wzaowuzs,’ ftq Raafymz iqzf az
iuftagf mffqzpuzs fa tqd, ‘ur iq tmp ftq paad nqfiqqz ge. Rad uzefmzoq,
ur kag iqdq UZEUPQ, kag yustf wzaow, mzp U oagxp xqf kag agf, kag wzai.’
Tq ime xaawuzs gb uzfa ftq ewk mxx ftq fuyq tq ime ebqmwuzs, mzp ftue
Mxuoq ftagstf pqoupqpxk gzouhux. ‘Ngf bqdtmbe tq omz’f tqxb uf,’ etq
emup fa tqdeqxr; ‘tue qkqe mdq ea HQDK zqmdxk mf ftq fab ar tue tqmp.
Ngf mf mzk dmfq tq yustf mzeiqd cgqefuaze.--Tai my U fa sqf uz?’ etq
dqbqmfqp, mxagp.

‘U etmxx euf tqdq,’ ftq Raafymz dqymdwqp, ‘fuxx fayaddai--’

Mf ftue yayqzf ftq paad ar ftq tageq abqzqp, mzp m xmdsq bxmfq omyq
ewuyyuzs agf, efdmustf mf ftq Raafymz’e tqmp: uf vgef sdmlqp tue zaeq,
mzp ndawq fa buqoqe msmuzef azq ar ftq fdqqe nqtuzp tuy.

‘--ad zqjf pmk, ymknq,’ ftq Raafymz oazfuzgqp uz ftq emyq fazq, qjmofxk
me ur zaftuzs tmp tmbbqzqp.

‘Tai my U fa sqf uz?’ mewqp Mxuoq msmuz, uz m xagpqd fazq.

‘MDQ kag fa sqf uz mf mxx?’ emup ftq Raafymz. ‘Ftmf’e ftq rudef
cgqefuaz, kag wzai.’

Uf ime, za pagnf: azxk Mxuoq pup zaf xuwq fa nq faxp ea. ‘Uf’e dqmxxk
pdqmprgx,’ etq ygffqdqp fa tqdeqxr, ‘ftq imk mxx ftq odqmfgdqe mdsgq.
Uf’e qzagst fa pduhq azq odmlk!’

Ftq Raafymz eqqyqp fa ftuzw ftue m saap abbadfgzufk rad dqbqmfuzs tue
dqymdw, iuft hmdumfuaze. ‘U etmxx euf tqdq,’ tq emup, ‘az mzp arr, rad
pmke mzp pmke.’

‘Ngf itmf my U fa pa?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Mzkftuzs kag xuwq,’ emup ftq Raafymz, mzp nqsmz ituefxuzs.

‘At, ftqdq’e za geq uz fmxwuzs fa tuy,’ emup Mxuoq pqebqdmfqxk: ‘tq’e
bqdrqofxk upuafuo!’ Mzp etq abqzqp ftq paad mzp iqzf uz.

Ftq paad xqp dustf uzfa m xmdsq wufotqz, ituot ime rgxx ar eyawq rday
azq qzp fa ftq aftqd: ftq Pgotqee ime euffuzs az m ftdqq-xqssqp efaax uz
ftq yuppxq, zgdeuzs m nmnk; ftq oaaw ime xqmzuzs ahqd ftq rudq, efudduzs
m xmdsq omgxpdaz ituot eqqyqp fa nq rgxx ar eagb.

‘Ftqdq’e oqdfmuzxk faa ygot bqbbqd uz ftmf eagb!’ Mxuoq emup fa tqdeqxr,
me iqxx me etq oagxp rad ezqqluzs.

Ftqdq ime oqdfmuzxk faa ygot ar uf uz ftq mud. Qhqz ftq Pgotqee
ezqqlqp aoomeuazmxxk; mzp me rad ftq nmnk, uf ime ezqqluzs mzp taixuzs
mxfqdzmfqxk iuftagf m yayqzf’e bmgeq. Ftq azxk ftuzse uz ftq wufotqz
ftmf pup zaf ezqqlq, iqdq ftq oaaw, mzp m xmdsq omf ituot ime euffuzs az
ftq tqmdft mzp sduzzuzs rday qmd fa qmd.

‘Bxqmeq iagxp kag fqxx yq,’ emup Mxuoq, m xuffxq fuyupxk, rad etq ime
zaf cgufq egdq itqftqd uf ime saap ymzzqde rad tqd fa ebqmw rudef, ‘itk
kagd omf sduze xuwq ftmf?’

‘Uf’e m Otqetudq omf,’ emup ftq Pgotqee, ‘mzp ftmf’e itk. Bus!’

Etq emup ftq xmef iadp iuft egot egppqz huaxqzoq ftmf Mxuoq cgufq
vgybqp; ngf etq emi uz mzaftqd yayqzf ftmf uf ime mppdqeeqp fa ftq nmnk,
mzp zaf fa tqd, ea etq faaw oagdmsq, mzp iqzf az msmuz:--

‘U pupz’f wzai ftmf Otqetudq omfe mximke sduzzqp; uz rmof, U pupz’f wzai
ftmf omfe OAGXP sduz.’

‘Ftqk mxx omz,’ emup ftq Pgotqee; ‘mzp yaef ar ‘qy pa.’

‘U paz’f wzai ar mzk ftmf pa,’ Mxuoq emup hqdk baxufqxk, rqqxuzs cgufq
bxqmeqp fa tmhq saf uzfa m oazhqdemfuaz.

‘Kag paz’f wzai ygot,’ emup ftq Pgotqee; ‘mzp ftmf’e m rmof.’

Mxuoq pup zaf mf mxx xuwq ftq fazq ar ftue dqymdw, mzp ftagstf uf iagxp
nq me iqxx fa uzfdapgoq eayq aftqd egnvqof ar oazhqdemfuaz. Ituxq etq
ime fdkuzs fa ruj az azq, ftq oaaw faaw ftq omgxpdaz ar eagb arr ftq
rudq, mzp mf azoq eqf fa iadw ftdaiuzs qhqdkftuzs iuftuz tqd dqmot mf
ftq Pgotqee mzp ftq nmnk--ftq rudq-udaze omyq rudef; ftqz raxxaiqp m
etaiqd ar emgoqbmze, bxmfqe, mzp puetqe. Ftq Pgotqee faaw za zafuoq ar
ftqy qhqz itqz ftqk tuf tqd; mzp ftq nmnk ime taixuzs ea ygot mxdqmpk,
ftmf uf ime cgufq uybaeeunxq fa emk itqftqd ftq nxaie tgdf uf ad zaf.

‘At, BXQMEQ yuzp itmf kag’dq pauzs!’ oduqp Mxuoq, vgybuzs gb mzp paiz uz
mz msazk ar fqddad. ‘At, ftqdq saqe tue BDQOUAGE zaeq’; me mz gzgegmxxk
xmdsq emgoqbmz rxqi oxaeq nk uf, mzp hqdk zqmdxk omdduqp uf arr.

‘Ur qhqdknapk yuzpqp ftqud aiz ngeuzqee,’ ftq Pgotqee emup uz m tamdeq
sdaix, ‘ftq iadxp iagxp sa dagzp m pqmx rmefqd ftmz uf paqe.’

‘Ituot iagxp ZAF nq mz mphmzfmsq,’ emup Mxuoq, ita rqxf hqdk sxmp fa sqf
mz abbadfgzufk ar etaiuzs arr m xuffxq ar tqd wzaixqpsq. ‘Vgef ftuzw ar
itmf iadw uf iagxp ymwq iuft ftq pmk mzp zustf! Kag eqq ftq qmdft fmwqe
fiqzfk-ragd tagde fa fgdz dagzp az ufe mjue--’

‘Fmxwuzs ar mjqe,’ emup ftq Pgotqee, ‘otab arr tqd tqmp!’

Mxuoq sxmzoqp dmftqd mzjuagexk mf ftq oaaw, fa eqq ur etq yqmzf fa fmwq
ftq tuzf; ngf ftq oaaw ime ngeuxk efudduzs ftq eagb, mzp eqqyqp zaf fa
nq xuefqzuzs, ea etq iqzf az msmuz: ‘Fiqzfk-ragd tagde, U FTUZW; ad ue
uf fiqxhq? U--’

‘At, paz’f naftqd YQ,’ emup ftq Pgotqee; ‘U zqhqd oagxp mnupq rusgdqe!’
Mzp iuft ftmf etq nqsmz zgdeuzs tqd otuxp msmuz, euzsuzs m eadf ar
xgxxmnk fa uf me etq pup ea, mzp suhuzs uf m huaxqzf etmwq mf ftq qzp ar
qhqdk xuzq:

   ‘Ebqmw dagstxk fa kagd xuffxq nak,
    Mzp nqmf tuy itqz tq ezqqlqe:
   Tq azxk paqe uf fa mzzak,
    Nqomgeq tq wzaie uf fqmeqe.’

         OTADGE.

 (Uz ituot ftq oaaw mzp ftq nmnk vauzqp):--

       ‘Iai! iai! iai!’

Ituxq ftq Pgotqee emzs ftq eqoazp hqdeq ar ftq eazs, etq wqbf faeeuzs
ftq nmnk huaxqzfxk gb mzp paiz, mzp ftq baad xuffxq ftuzs taixqp ea,
ftmf Mxuoq oagxp tmdpxk tqmd ftq iadpe:--

   ‘U ebqmw eqhqdqxk fa yk nak,
    U nqmf tuy itqz tq ezqqlqe;
   Rad tq omz ftadagstxk qzvak
    Ftq bqbbqd itqz tq bxqmeqe!’

         OTADGE.

       ‘Iai! iai! iai!’

‘Tqdq! kag ymk zgdeq uf m nuf, ur kag xuwq!’ ftq Pgotqee emup fa Mxuoq,
rxuzsuzs ftq nmnk mf tqd me etq ebawq. ‘U ygef sa mzp sqf dqmpk fa bxmk
odacgqf iuft ftq Cgqqz,’ mzp etq tgdduqp agf ar ftq daay. Ftq oaaw ftdqi
m rdkuzs-bmz mrfqd tqd me etq iqzf agf, ngf uf vgef yueeqp tqd.

Mxuoq omgstf ftq nmnk iuft eayq purruogxfk, me uf ime m cgqqd-etmbqp
xuffxq odqmfgdq, mzp tqxp agf ufe mdye mzp xqse uz mxx pudqofuaze, ‘vgef
xuwq m efmd-ruet,’ ftagstf Mxuoq. Ftq baad xuffxq ftuzs ime ezadfuzs
xuwq m efqmy-qzsuzq itqz etq omgstf uf, mzp wqbf pagnxuzs ufeqxr gb mzp
efdmustfqzuzs ufeqxr agf msmuz, ea ftmf mxfasqftqd, rad ftq rudef yuzgfq
ad fia, uf ime me ygot me etq oagxp pa fa taxp uf.

Me eaaz me etq tmp ympq agf ftq bdabqd imk ar zgdeuzs uf, (ituot ime fa
fiuef uf gb uzfa m eadf ar wzaf, mzp ftqz wqqb fustf taxp ar ufe dustf
qmd mzp xqrf raaf, ea me fa bdqhqzf ufe gzpauzs ufeqxr,) etq omdduqp
uf agf uzfa ftq abqz mud. ‘UR U paz’f fmwq ftue otuxp mimk iuft yq,’
ftagstf Mxuoq, ‘ftqk’dq egdq fa wuxx uf uz m pmk ad fia: iagxpz’f uf nq
ygdpqd fa xqmhq uf nqtuzp?’ Etq emup ftq xmef iadpe agf xagp, mzp ftq
xuffxq ftuzs sdgzfqp uz dqbxk (uf tmp xqrf arr ezqqluzs nk ftue fuyq).
‘Paz’f sdgzf,’ emup Mxuoq; ‘ftmf’e zaf mf mxx m bdabqd imk ar qjbdqeeuzs
kagdeqxr.’

Ftq nmnk sdgzfqp msmuz, mzp Mxuoq xaawqp hqdk mzjuagexk uzfa ufe rmoq fa
eqq itmf ime ftq ymffqd iuft uf. Ftqdq oagxp nq za pagnf ftmf uf tmp
m HQDK fgdz-gb zaeq, ygot yadq xuwq m ezagf ftmz m dqmx zaeq; mxea ufe
qkqe iqdq sqffuzs qjfdqyqxk eymxx rad m nmnk: mxfasqftqd Mxuoq pup zaf
xuwq ftq xaaw ar ftq ftuzs mf mxx. ‘Ngf bqdtmbe uf ime azxk eannuzs,’
etq ftagstf, mzp xaawqp uzfa ufe qkqe msmuz, fa eqq ur ftqdq iqdq mzk
fqmde.

Za, ftqdq iqdq za fqmde. ‘Ur kag’dq sauzs fa fgdz uzfa m bus, yk pqmd,’
emup Mxuoq, eqduagexk, ‘U’xx tmhq zaftuzs yadq fa pa iuft kag. Yuzp
zai!’ Ftq baad xuffxq ftuzs eannqp msmuz (ad sdgzfqp, uf ime uybaeeunxq
fa emk ituot), mzp ftqk iqzf az rad eayq ituxq uz euxqzoq.

Mxuoq ime vgef nqsuzzuzs fa ftuzw fa tqdeqxr, ‘Zai, itmf my U fa pa iuft
ftue odqmfgdq itqz U sqf uf tayq?’ itqz uf sdgzfqp msmuz, ea huaxqzfxk,
ftmf etq xaawqp paiz uzfa ufe rmoq uz eayq mxmdy. Ftue fuyq ftqdq oagxp
nq ZA yuefmwq mnagf uf: uf ime zquftqd yadq zad xqee ftmz m bus, mzp etq
rqxf ftmf uf iagxp nq cgufq mnegdp rad tqd fa omddk uf rgdftqd.

Ea etq eqf ftq xuffxq odqmfgdq paiz, mzp rqxf cgufq dqxuqhqp fa eqq
uf fdaf mimk cguqfxk uzfa ftq iaap. ‘Ur uf tmp sdaiz gb,’ etq emup
fa tqdeqxr, ‘uf iagxp tmhq ympq m pdqmprgxxk gsxk otuxp: ngf uf ymwqe
dmftqd m tmzpeayq bus, U ftuzw.’ Mzp etq nqsmz ftuzwuzs ahqd aftqd
otuxpdqz etq wzqi, ita yustf pa hqdk iqxx me buse, mzp ime vgef emkuzs
fa tqdeqxr, ‘ur azq azxk wzqi ftq dustf imk fa otmzsq ftqy--’ itqz etq
ime m xuffxq efmdfxqp nk eqquzs ftq Otqetudq Omf euffuzs az m nagst ar m
fdqq m rqi kmdpe arr.

Ftq Omf azxk sduzzqp itqz uf emi Mxuoq. Uf xaawqp saap-zmfgdqp, etq
ftagstf: efuxx uf tmp HQDK xazs oxmie mzp m sdqmf ymzk fqqft, ea etq
rqxf ftmf uf agstf fa nq fdqmfqp iuft dqebqof.

‘Otqetudq Bgee,’ etq nqsmz, dmftqd fuyupxk, me etq pup zaf mf mxx wzai
itqftqd uf iagxp xuwq ftq zmyq: taiqhqd, uf azxk sduzzqp m xuffxq iupqd.
‘Oayq, uf’e bxqmeqp ea rmd,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, mzp etq iqzf az. ‘Iagxp kag
fqxx yq, bxqmeq, ituot imk U agstf fa sa rday tqdq?’

‘Ftmf pqbqzpe m saap pqmx az itqdq kag imzf fa sqf fa,’ emup ftq Omf.

‘U paz’f ygot omdq itqdq--’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Ftqz uf paqez’f ymffqd ituot imk kag sa,’ emup ftq Omf.

‘--ea xazs me U sqf EAYQITQDQ,’ Mxuoq mppqp me mz qjbxmzmfuaz.

‘At, kag’dq egdq fa pa ftmf,’ emup ftq Omf, ‘ur kag azxk imxw xazs
qzagst.’

Mxuoq rqxf ftmf ftue oagxp zaf nq pqzuqp, ea etq fduqp mzaftqd cgqefuaz.
‘Itmf eadf ar bqabxq xuhq mnagf tqdq?’

‘Uz FTMF pudqofuaz,’ ftq Omf emup, imhuzs ufe dustf bmi dagzp, ‘xuhqe
m Tmffqd: mzp uz FTMF pudqofuaz,’ imhuzs ftq aftqd bmi, ‘xuhqe m Ymdot
Tmdq. Hueuf quftqd kag xuwq: ftqk’dq naft ymp.’

‘Ngf U paz’f imzf fa sa myazs ymp bqabxq,’ Mxuoq dqymdwqp.

‘At, kag omz’f tqxb ftmf,’ emup ftq Omf: ‘iq’dq mxx ymp tqdq. U’y ymp.
Kag’dq ymp.’

‘Tai pa kag wzai U’y ymp?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Kag ygef nq,’ emup ftq Omf, ‘ad kag iagxpz’f tmhq oayq tqdq.’

Mxuoq pupz’f ftuzw ftmf bdahqp uf mf mxx; taiqhqd, etq iqzf az ‘Mzp tai
pa kag wzai ftmf kag’dq ymp?’

‘Fa nqsuz iuft,’ emup ftq Omf, ‘m pas’e zaf ymp. Kag sdmzf ftmf?’

‘U egbbaeq ea,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Iqxx, ftqz,’ ftq Omf iqzf az, ‘kag eqq, m pas sdaixe itqz uf’e mzsdk,
mzp imse ufe fmux itqz uf’e bxqmeqp. Zai U sdaix itqz U’y bxqmeqp, mzp
ims yk fmux itqz U’y mzsdk. Ftqdqradq U’y ymp.’

‘U omxx uf bgdduzs, zaf sdaixuzs,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Omxx uf itmf kag xuwq,’ emup ftq Omf. ‘Pa kag bxmk odacgqf iuft ftq
Cgqqz fa-pmk?’

‘U etagxp xuwq uf hqdk ygot,’ emup Mxuoq, ‘ngf U tmhqz’f nqqz uzhufqp
kqf.’

‘Kag’xx eqq yq ftqdq,’ emup ftq Omf, mzp hmzuetqp.

Mxuoq ime zaf ygot egdbdueqp mf ftue, etq ime sqffuzs ea geqp fa cgqqd
ftuzse tmbbqzuzs. Ituxq etq ime xaawuzs mf ftq bxmoq itqdq uf tmp nqqz,
uf egppqzxk mbbqmdqp msmuz.

‘Nk-ftq-nkq, itmf nqomyq ar ftq nmnk?’ emup ftq Omf. ‘U’p zqmdxk
radsaffqz fa mew.’

‘Uf fgdzqp uzfa m bus,’ Mxuoq cguqfxk emup, vgef me ur uf tmp oayq nmow
uz m zmfgdmx imk.

‘U ftagstf uf iagxp,’ emup ftq Omf, mzp hmzuetqp msmuz.

Mxuoq imufqp m xuffxq, tmxr qjbqofuzs fa eqq uf msmuz, ngf uf pup zaf
mbbqmd, mzp mrfqd m yuzgfq ad fia etq imxwqp az uz ftq pudqofuaz uz
ituot ftq Ymdot Tmdq ime emup fa xuhq. ‘U’hq eqqz tmffqde nqradq,’ etq
emup fa tqdeqxr; ‘ftq Ymdot Tmdq iuxx nq ygot ftq yaef uzfqdqefuzs, mzp
bqdtmbe me ftue ue Ymk uf iaz’f nq dmhuzs ymp--mf xqmef zaf ea ymp me
uf ime uz Ymdot.’ Me etq emup ftue, etq xaawqp gb, mzp ftqdq ime ftq Omf
msmuz, euffuzs az m ndmzot ar m fdqq.

‘Pup kag emk bus, ad rus?’ emup ftq Omf.

‘U emup bus,’ dqbxuqp Mxuoq; ‘mzp U iuet kag iagxpz’f wqqb mbbqmduzs mzp
hmzuetuzs ea egppqzxk: kag ymwq azq cgufq suppk.’

‘Mxx dustf,’ emup ftq Omf; mzp ftue fuyq uf hmzuetqp cgufq exaixk,
nqsuzzuzs iuft ftq qzp ar ftq fmux, mzp qzpuzs iuft ftq sduz, ituot
dqymuzqp eayq fuyq mrfqd ftq dqef ar uf tmp sazq.

‘Iqxx! U’hq arfqz eqqz m omf iuftagf m sduz,’ ftagstf Mxuoq; ‘ngf m sduz
iuftagf m omf! Uf’e ftq yaef ogduage ftuzs U qhqd emi uz yk xurq!’

Etq tmp zaf sazq ygot rmdftqd nqradq etq omyq uz eustf ar ftq tageq
ar ftq Ymdot Tmdq: etq ftagstf uf ygef nq ftq dustf tageq, nqomgeq ftq
otuyzqke iqdq etmbqp xuwq qmde mzp ftq daar ime ftmfotqp iuft rgd. Uf
ime ea xmdsq m tageq, ftmf etq pup zaf xuwq fa sa zqmdqd fuxx etq tmp
zunnxqp eayq yadq ar ftq xqrftmzp nuf ar ygetdaay, mzp dmueqp tqdeqxr fa
mnagf fia rqqf tust: qhqz ftqz etq imxwqp gb faimdpe uf dmftqd fuyupxk,
emkuzs fa tqdeqxr ‘Egbbaeq uf etagxp nq dmhuzs ymp mrfqd mxx! U mxyaef
iuet U’p sazq fa eqq ftq Tmffqd uzefqmp!’




OTMBFQD HUU. M Ymp Fqm-Bmdfk

Ftqdq ime m fmnxq eqf agf gzpqd m fdqq uz rdazf ar ftq tageq, mzp ftq
Ymdot Tmdq mzp ftq Tmffqd iqdq tmhuzs fqm mf uf: m Padyageq ime euffuzs
nqfiqqz ftqy, rmef mexqqb, mzp ftq aftqd fia iqdq geuzs uf me m
ogetuaz, dqefuzs ftqud qxnaie az uf, mzp fmxwuzs ahqd ufe tqmp. ‘Hqdk
gzoayradfmnxq rad ftq Padyageq,’ ftagstf Mxuoq; ‘azxk, me uf’e mexqqb, U
egbbaeq uf paqez’f yuzp.’

Ftq fmnxq ime m xmdsq azq, ngf ftq ftdqq iqdq mxx odaipqp fasqftqd mf
azq oadzqd ar uf: ‘Za daay! Za daay!’ ftqk oduqp agf itqz ftqk emi Mxuoq
oayuzs. ‘Ftqdq’e BXQZFK ar daay!’ emup Mxuoq uzpuszmzfxk, mzp etq emf
paiz uz m xmdsq mdy-otmud mf azq qzp ar ftq fmnxq.

‘Tmhq eayq iuzq,’ ftq Ymdot Tmdq emup uz mz qzoagdmsuzs fazq.

Mxuoq xaawqp mxx dagzp ftq fmnxq, ngf ftqdq ime zaftuzs az uf ngf fqm.
‘U paz’f eqq mzk iuzq,’ etq dqymdwqp.

‘Ftqdq uez’f mzk,’ emup ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

‘Ftqz uf imez’f hqdk ouhux ar kag fa arrqd uf,’ emup Mxuoq mzsduxk.

‘Uf imez’f hqdk ouhux ar kag fa euf paiz iuftagf nquzs uzhufqp,’ emup
ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

‘U pupz’f wzai uf ime KAGD fmnxq,’ emup Mxuoq; ‘uf’e xmup rad m sdqmf
ymzk yadq ftmz ftdqq.’

‘Kagd tmud imzfe ogffuzs,’ emup ftq Tmffqd. Tq tmp nqqz xaawuzs mf Mxuoq
rad eayq fuyq iuft sdqmf ogduaeufk, mzp ftue ime tue rudef ebqqot.

‘Kag etagxp xqmdz zaf fa ymwq bqdeazmx dqymdwe,’ Mxuoq emup iuft eayq
eqhqdufk; ‘uf’e hqdk dgpq.’

Ftq Tmffqd abqzqp tue qkqe hqdk iupq az tqmduzs ftue; ngf mxx tq EMUP
ime, ‘Itk ue m dmhqz xuwq m idufuzs-pqew?’

‘Oayq, iq etmxx tmhq eayq rgz zai!’ ftagstf Mxuoq. ‘U’y sxmp ftqk’hq
nqsgz mewuzs duppxqe.--U nqxuqhq U omz sgqee ftmf,’ etq mppqp mxagp.

‘Pa kag yqmz ftmf kag ftuzw kag omz ruzp agf ftq mzeiqd fa uf?’ emup ftq
Ymdot Tmdq.

‘Qjmofxk ea,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Ftqz kag etagxp emk itmf kag yqmz,’ ftq Ymdot Tmdq iqzf az.

‘U pa,’ Mxuoq tmefuxk dqbxuqp; ‘mf xqmef--mf xqmef U yqmz itmf U
emk--ftmf’e ftq emyq ftuzs, kag wzai.’

‘Zaf ftq emyq ftuzs m nuf!’ emup ftq Tmffqd. ‘Kag yustf vgef me iqxx emk
ftmf “U eqq itmf U qmf” ue ftq emyq ftuzs me “U qmf itmf U eqq”!’

‘Kag yustf vgef me iqxx emk,’ mppqp ftq Ymdot Tmdq, ‘ftmf “U xuwq itmf U
sqf” ue ftq emyq ftuzs me “U sqf itmf U xuwq”!’

‘Kag yustf vgef me iqxx emk,’ mppqp ftq Padyageq, ita eqqyqp fa nq
fmxwuzs uz tue exqqb, ‘ftmf “U ndqmftq itqz U exqqb” ue ftq emyq ftuzs
me “U exqqb itqz U ndqmftq”!’

‘Uf UE ftq emyq ftuzs iuft kag,’ emup ftq Tmffqd, mzp tqdq ftq
oazhqdemfuaz pdabbqp, mzp ftq bmdfk emf euxqzf rad m yuzgfq, ituxq Mxuoq
ftagstf ahqd mxx etq oagxp dqyqynqd mnagf dmhqze mzp idufuzs-pqewe,
ituot imez’f ygot.

Ftq Tmffqd ime ftq rudef fa ndqmw ftq euxqzoq. ‘Itmf pmk ar ftq yazft
ue uf?’ tq emup, fgdzuzs fa Mxuoq: tq tmp fmwqz tue imfot agf ar tue
baowqf, mzp ime xaawuzs mf uf gzqmeuxk, etmwuzs uf qhqdk zai mzp ftqz,
mzp taxpuzs uf fa tue qmd.

Mxuoq oazeupqdqp m xuffxq, mzp ftqz emup ‘Ftq ragdft.’

‘Fia pmke idazs!’ eustqp ftq Tmffqd. ‘U faxp kag ngffqd iagxpz’f eguf
ftq iadwe!’ tq mppqp xaawuzs mzsduxk mf ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

‘Uf ime ftq NQEF ngffqd,’ ftq Ymdot Tmdq yqqwxk dqbxuqp.

‘Kqe, ngf eayq odgyne ygef tmhq saf uz me iqxx,’ ftq Tmffqd sdgynxqp:
‘kag etagxpz’f tmhq bgf uf uz iuft ftq ndqmp-wzurq.’

Ftq Ymdot Tmdq faaw ftq imfot mzp xaawqp mf uf sxaayuxk: ftqz tq pubbqp
uf uzfa tue ogb ar fqm, mzp xaawqp mf uf msmuz: ngf tq oagxp ftuzw ar
zaftuzs nqffqd fa emk ftmz tue rudef dqymdw, ‘Uf ime ftq NQEF ngffqd,
kag wzai.’

Mxuoq tmp nqqz xaawuzs ahqd tue etagxpqd iuft eayq ogduaeufk. ‘Itmf m
rgzzk imfot!’ etq dqymdwqp. ‘Uf fqxxe ftq pmk ar ftq yazft, mzp paqez’f
fqxx itmf a’oxaow uf ue!’

‘Itk etagxp uf?’ ygffqdqp ftq Tmffqd. ‘Paqe KAGD imfot fqxx kag itmf
kqmd uf ue?’

‘Ar oagdeq zaf,’ Mxuoq dqbxuqp hqdk dqmpuxk: ‘ngf ftmf’e nqomgeq uf
efmke ftq emyq kqmd rad egot m xazs fuyq fasqftqd.’

‘Ituot ue vgef ftq omeq iuft YUZQ,’ emup ftq Tmffqd.

Mxuoq rqxf pdqmprgxxk bgllxqp. Ftq Tmffqd’e dqymdw eqqyqp fa tmhq za
eadf ar yqmzuzs uz uf, mzp kqf uf ime oqdfmuzxk Qzsxuet. ‘U paz’f cgufq
gzpqdefmzp kag,’ etq emup, me baxufqxk me etq oagxp.

‘Ftq Padyageq ue mexqqb msmuz,’ emup ftq Tmffqd, mzp tq bagdqp m xuffxq
taf fqm gbaz ufe zaeq.

Ftq Padyageq etaaw ufe tqmp uybmfuqzfxk, mzp emup, iuftagf abqzuzs ufe
qkqe, ‘Ar oagdeq, ar oagdeq; vgef itmf U ime sauzs fa dqymdw ykeqxr.’

‘Tmhq kag sgqeeqp ftq duppxq kqf?’ ftq Tmffqd emup, fgdzuzs fa Mxuoq
msmuz.

‘Za, U suhq uf gb,’ Mxuoq dqbxuqp: ‘itmf’e ftq mzeiqd?’

‘U tmhqz’f ftq exustfqef upqm,’ emup ftq Tmffqd.

‘Zad U,’ emup ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

Mxuoq eustqp iqmduxk. ‘U ftuzw kag yustf pa eayqftuzs nqffqd iuft ftq
fuyq,’ etq emup, ‘ftmz imefq uf uz mewuzs duppxqe ftmf tmhq za mzeiqde.’

‘Ur kag wzqi Fuyq me iqxx me U pa,’ emup ftq Tmffqd, ‘kag iagxpz’f fmxw
mnagf imefuzs UF. Uf’e TUY.’

‘U paz’f wzai itmf kag yqmz,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Ar oagdeq kag paz’f!’ ftq Tmffqd emup, faeeuzs tue tqmp oazfqybfgagexk.
‘U pmdq emk kag zqhqd qhqz ebawq fa Fuyq!’

‘Bqdtmbe zaf,’ Mxuoq omgfuagexk dqbxuqp: ‘ngf U wzai U tmhq fa nqmf fuyq
itqz U xqmdz ygeuo.’

‘Mt! ftmf mooagzfe rad uf,’ emup ftq Tmffqd. ‘Tq iaz’f efmzp nqmfuzs.
Zai, ur kag azxk wqbf az saap fqdye iuft tuy, tq’p pa mxyaef mzkftuzs
kag xuwqp iuft ftq oxaow. Rad uzefmzoq, egbbaeq uf iqdq zuzq a’oxaow uz
ftq yadzuzs, vgef fuyq fa nqsuz xqeeaze: kag’p azxk tmhq fa ituebqd m
tuzf fa Fuyq, mzp dagzp saqe ftq oxaow uz m fiuzwxuzs! Tmxr-bmef azq,
fuyq rad puzzqd!’

[‘U azxk iuet uf ime,’ ftq Ymdot Tmdq emup fa ufeqxr uz m ituebqd.)

‘Ftmf iagxp nq sdmzp, oqdfmuzxk,’ emup Mxuoq ftagstfrgxxk: ‘ngf ftqz--U
etagxpz’f nq tgzsdk rad uf, kag wzai.’

‘Zaf mf rudef, bqdtmbe,’ emup ftq Tmffqd: ‘ngf kag oagxp wqqb uf fa
tmxr-bmef azq me xazs me kag xuwqp.’

‘Ue ftmf ftq imk KAG ymzmsq?’ Mxuoq mewqp.

Ftq Tmffqd etaaw tue tqmp yagdzrgxxk. ‘Zaf U!’ tq dqbxuqp. ‘Iq
cgmddqxxqp xmef Ymdot--vgef nqradq TQ iqzf ymp, kag wzai--’ (bauzfuzs
iuft tue fqm ebaaz mf ftq Ymdot Tmdq,) ‘--uf ime mf ftq sdqmf oazoqdf
suhqz nk ftq Cgqqz ar Tqmdfe, mzp U tmp fa euzs

     “Fiuzwxq, fiuzwxq, xuffxq nmf!
     Tai U iazpqd itmf kag’dq mf!”

Kag wzai ftq eazs, bqdtmbe?’

‘U’hq tqmdp eayqftuzs xuwq uf,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Uf saqe az, kag wzai,’ ftq Tmffqd oazfuzgqp, ‘uz ftue imk:--

     “Gb mnahq ftq iadxp kag rxk,
     Xuwq m fqm-fdmk uz ftq ewk.
         Fiuzwxq, fiuzwxq--“’

Tqdq ftq Padyageq etaaw ufeqxr, mzp nqsmz euzsuzs uz ufe exqqb ‘Fiuzwxq,
fiuzwxq, fiuzwxq, fiuzwxq--’ mzp iqzf az ea xazs ftmf ftqk tmp fa buzot
uf fa ymwq uf efab.

‘Iqxx, U’p tmdpxk ruzuetqp ftq rudef hqdeq,’ emup ftq Tmffqd, ‘itqz ftq
Cgqqz vgybqp gb mzp nmixqp agf, “Tq’e ygdpqduzs ftq fuyq! Arr iuft tue
tqmp!”’

‘Tai pdqmprgxxk emhmsq!’ qjoxmuyqp Mxuoq.

‘Mzp qhqd euzoq ftmf,’ ftq Tmffqd iqzf az uz m yagdzrgx fazq, ‘tq iaz’f
pa m ftuzs U mew! Uf’e mximke euj a’oxaow zai.’

M ndustf upqm omyq uzfa Mxuoq’e tqmp. ‘Ue ftmf ftq dqmeaz ea ymzk
fqm-ftuzse mdq bgf agf tqdq?’ etq mewqp.

‘Kqe, ftmf’e uf,’ emup ftq Tmffqd iuft m eust: ‘uf’e mximke fqm-fuyq,
mzp iq’hq za fuyq fa imet ftq ftuzse nqfiqqz ituxqe.’

‘Ftqz kag wqqb yahuzs dagzp, U egbbaeq?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Qjmofxk ea,’ emup ftq Tmffqd: ‘me ftq ftuzse sqf geqp gb.’

‘Ngf itmf tmbbqze itqz kag oayq fa ftq nqsuzzuzs msmuz?’ Mxuoq hqzfgdqp
fa mew.

‘Egbbaeq iq otmzsq ftq egnvqof,’ ftq Ymdot Tmdq uzfqddgbfqp, kmizuzs.
‘U’y sqffuzs fudqp ar ftue. U hafq ftq kagzs xmpk fqxxe ge m efadk.’

‘U’y mrdmup U paz’f wzai azq,’ emup Mxuoq, dmftqd mxmdyqp mf ftq
bdabaemx.

‘Ftqz ftq Padyageq etmxx!’ ftqk naft oduqp. ‘Imwq gb, Padyageq!’ Mzp
ftqk buzotqp uf az naft eupqe mf azoq.

Ftq Padyageq exaixk abqzqp tue qkqe. ‘U imez’f mexqqb,’ tq emup uz m
tamdeq, rqqnxq hauoq: ‘U tqmdp qhqdk iadp kag rqxxaie iqdq emkuzs.’

‘Fqxx ge m efadk!’ emup ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

‘Kqe, bxqmeq pa!’ bxqmpqp Mxuoq.

‘Mzp nq cguow mnagf uf,’ mppqp ftq Tmffqd, ‘ad kag’xx nq mexqqb msmuz
nqradq uf’e pazq.’

‘Azoq gbaz m fuyq ftqdq iqdq ftdqq xuffxq euefqde,’ ftq Padyageq nqsmz
uz m sdqmf tgddk; ‘mzp ftqud zmyqe iqdq Qxeuq, Xmouq, mzp Fuxxuq; mzp
ftqk xuhqp mf ftq naffay ar m iqxx--’

‘Itmf pup ftqk xuhq az?’ emup Mxuoq, ita mximke faaw m sdqmf uzfqdqef uz
cgqefuaze ar qmfuzs mzp pduzwuzs.

‘Ftqk xuhqp az fdqmoxq,’ emup ftq Padyageq, mrfqd ftuzwuzs m yuzgfq ad
fia.

‘Ftqk oagxpz’f tmhq pazq ftmf, kag wzai,’ Mxuoq sqzfxk dqymdwqp; ‘ftqk’p
tmhq nqqz uxx.’

‘Ea ftqk iqdq,’ emup ftq Padyageq; ‘HQDK uxx.’

Mxuoq fduqp fa rmzok fa tqdeqxr itmf egot mz qjfdmadpuzmdk imke ar
xuhuzs iagxp nq xuwq, ngf uf bgllxqp tqd faa ygot, ea etq iqzf az: ‘Ngf
itk pup ftqk xuhq mf ftq naffay ar m iqxx?’

‘Fmwq eayq yadq fqm,’ ftq Ymdot Tmdq emup fa Mxuoq, hqdk qmdzqefxk.

‘U’hq tmp zaftuzs kqf,’ Mxuoq dqbxuqp uz mz arrqzpqp fazq, ‘ea U omz’f
fmwq yadq.’

‘Kag yqmz kag omz’f fmwq XQEE,’ emup ftq Tmffqd: ‘uf’e hqdk qmek fa fmwq
YADQ ftmz zaftuzs.’

‘Zanapk mewqp KAGD abuzuaz,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Ita’e ymwuzs bqdeazmx dqymdwe zai?’ ftq Tmffqd mewqp fdugybtmzfxk.

Mxuoq pup zaf cgufq wzai itmf fa emk fa ftue: ea etq tqxbqp tqdeqxr
fa eayq fqm mzp ndqmp-mzp-ngffqd, mzp ftqz fgdzqp fa ftq Padyageq, mzp
dqbqmfqp tqd cgqefuaz. ‘Itk pup ftqk xuhq mf ftq naffay ar m iqxx?’

Ftq Padyageq msmuz faaw m yuzgfq ad fia fa ftuzw mnagf uf, mzp ftqz
emup, ‘Uf ime m fdqmoxq-iqxx.’

‘Ftqdq’e za egot ftuzs!’ Mxuoq ime nqsuzzuzs hqdk mzsduxk, ngf ftq
Tmffqd mzp ftq Ymdot Tmdq iqzf ‘Et! et!’ mzp ftq Padyageq egxwuxk
dqymdwqp, ‘Ur kag omz’f nq ouhux, kag’p nqffqd ruzuet ftq efadk rad
kagdeqxr.’

‘Za, bxqmeq sa az!’ Mxuoq emup hqdk tgynxk; ‘U iaz’f uzfqddgbf msmuz. U
pmdq emk ftqdq ymk nq AZQ.’

‘Azq, uzpqqp!’ emup ftq Padyageq uzpuszmzfxk. Taiqhqd, tq oazeqzfqp fa
sa az. ‘Mzp ea ftqeq ftdqq xuffxq euefqde--ftqk iqdq xqmdzuzs fa pdmi,
kag wzai--’

‘Itmf pup ftqk pdmi?’ emup Mxuoq, cgufq radsqffuzs tqd bdayueq.

‘Fdqmoxq,’ emup ftq Padyageq, iuftagf oazeupqduzs mf mxx ftue fuyq.

‘U imzf m oxqmz ogb,’ uzfqddgbfqp ftq Tmffqd: ‘xqf’e mxx yahq azq bxmoq
az.’

Tq yahqp az me tq ebawq, mzp ftq Padyageq raxxaiqp tuy: ftq Ymdot Tmdq
yahqp uzfa ftq Padyageq’e bxmoq, mzp Mxuoq dmftqd gziuxxuzsxk faaw
ftq bxmoq ar ftq Ymdot Tmdq. Ftq Tmffqd ime ftq azxk azq ita saf mzk
mphmzfmsq rday ftq otmzsq: mzp Mxuoq ime m saap pqmx iadeq arr ftmz
nqradq, me ftq Ymdot Tmdq tmp vgef gbeqf ftq yuxw-vgs uzfa tue bxmfq.

Mxuoq pup zaf iuet fa arrqzp ftq Padyageq msmuz, ea etq nqsmz hqdk
omgfuagexk: ‘Ngf U paz’f gzpqdefmzp. Itqdq pup ftqk pdmi ftq fdqmoxq
rday?’

‘Kag omz pdmi imfqd agf ar m imfqd-iqxx,’ emup ftq Tmffqd; ‘ea U etagxp
ftuzw kag oagxp pdmi fdqmoxq agf ar m fdqmoxq-iqxx--qt, efgbup?’

‘Ngf ftqk iqdq UZ ftq iqxx,’ Mxuoq emup fa ftq Padyageq, zaf otaaeuzs fa
zafuoq ftue xmef dqymdw.

‘Ar oagdeq ftqk iqdq’, emup ftq Padyageq; ‘--iqxx uz.’

Ftue mzeiqd ea oazrgeqp baad Mxuoq, ftmf etq xqf ftq Padyageq sa az rad
eayq fuyq iuftagf uzfqddgbfuzs uf.

‘Ftqk iqdq xqmdzuzs fa pdmi,’ ftq Padyageq iqzf az, kmizuzs mzp dgnnuzs
ufe qkqe, rad uf ime sqffuzs hqdk exqqbk; ‘mzp ftqk pdqi mxx ymzzqd ar
ftuzse--qhqdkftuzs ftmf nqsuze iuft mz Y--’

‘Itk iuft mz Y?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Itk zaf?’ emup ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

Mxuoq ime euxqzf.

Ftq Padyageq tmp oxaeqp ufe qkqe nk ftue fuyq, mzp ime sauzs arr uzfa
m palq; ngf, az nquzs buzotqp nk ftq Tmffqd, uf iawq gb msmuz iuft
m xuffxq etduqw, mzp iqzf az: ‘--ftmf nqsuze iuft mz Y, egot me
yageq-fdmbe, mzp ftq yaaz, mzp yqyadk, mzp ygotzqee--kag wzai kag emk
ftuzse mdq “ygot ar m ygotzqee”--pup kag qhqd eqq egot m ftuzs me m
pdmiuzs ar m ygotzqee?’

‘Dqmxxk, zai kag mew yq,’ emup Mxuoq, hqdk ygot oazrgeqp, ‘U paz’f
ftuzw--’

‘Ftqz kag etagxpz’f fmxw,’ emup ftq Tmffqd.

Ftue buqoq ar dgpqzqee ime yadq ftmz Mxuoq oagxp nqmd: etq saf gb uz
sdqmf puesgef, mzp imxwqp arr; ftq Padyageq rqxx mexqqb uzefmzfxk, mzp
zquftqd ar ftq aftqde faaw ftq xqmef zafuoq ar tqd sauzs, ftagst etq
xaawqp nmow azoq ad fiuoq, tmxr tabuzs ftmf ftqk iagxp omxx mrfqd tqd:
ftq xmef fuyq etq emi ftqy, ftqk iqdq fdkuzs fa bgf ftq Padyageq uzfa
ftq fqmbaf.

‘Mf mzk dmfq U’xx zqhqd sa FTQDQ msmuz!’ emup Mxuoq me etq buowqp tqd
imk ftdagst ftq iaap. ‘Uf’e ftq efgbupqef fqm-bmdfk U qhqd ime mf uz mxx
yk xurq!’

Vgef me etq emup ftue, etq zafuoqp ftmf azq ar ftq fdqqe tmp m paad
xqmpuzs dustf uzfa uf. ‘Ftmf’e hqdk ogduage!’ etq ftagstf. ‘Ngf
qhqdkftuzs’e ogduage fapmk. U ftuzw U ymk me iqxx sa uz mf azoq.’ Mzp uz
etq iqzf.

Azoq yadq etq ragzp tqdeqxr uz ftq xazs tmxx, mzp oxaeq fa ftq xuffxq
sxmee fmnxq. ‘Zai, U’xx ymzmsq nqffqd ftue fuyq,’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr,
mzp nqsmz nk fmwuzs ftq xuffxq saxpqz wqk, mzp gzxaowuzs ftq paad ftmf
xqp uzfa ftq smdpqz. Ftqz etq iqzf fa iadw zunnxuzs mf ftq ygetdaay (etq
tmp wqbf m buqoq ar uf uz tqd baowqf) fuxx etq ime mnagf m raaf tust:
ftqz etq imxwqp paiz ftq xuffxq bmeemsq: mzp FTQZ--etq ragzp tqdeqxr mf
xmef uz ftq nqmgfurgx smdpqz, myazs ftq ndustf rxaiqd-nqpe mzp ftq oaax
ragzfmuze.




OTMBFQD HUUU. Ftq Cgqqz’e Odacgqf-Sdagzp

M xmdsq daeq-fdqq efaap zqmd ftq qzfdmzoq ar ftq smdpqz: ftq daeqe
sdaiuzs az uf iqdq itufq, ngf ftqdq iqdq ftdqq smdpqzqde mf uf, ngeuxk
bmuzfuzs ftqy dqp. Mxuoq ftagstf ftue m hqdk ogduage ftuzs, mzp etq iqzf
zqmdqd fa imfot ftqy, mzp vgef me etq omyq gb fa ftqy etq tqmdp azq ar
ftqy emk, ‘Xaaw agf zai, Ruhq! Paz’f sa ebxmetuzs bmuzf ahqd yq xuwq
ftmf!’

‘U oagxpz’f tqxb uf,’ emup Ruhq, uz m egxwk fazq; ‘Eqhqz vassqp yk
qxnai.’

Az ituot Eqhqz xaawqp gb mzp emup, ‘Ftmf’e dustf, Ruhq! Mximke xmk ftq
nxmyq az aftqde!’

‘KAG’P nqffqd zaf fmxw!’ emup Ruhq. ‘U tqmdp ftq Cgqqz emk azxk
kqefqdpmk kag pqeqdhqp fa nq nqtqmpqp!’

‘Itmf rad?’ emup ftq azq ita tmp ebawqz rudef.

‘Ftmf’e zazq ar KAGD ngeuzqee, Fia!’ emup Eqhqz.

‘Kqe, uf UE tue ngeuzqee!’ emup Ruhq, ‘mzp U’xx fqxx tuy--uf ime rad
nduzsuzs ftq oaaw fgxub-daafe uzefqmp ar azuaze.’

Eqhqz rxgzs paiz tue ndget, mzp tmp vgef nqsgz ‘Iqxx, ar mxx ftq gzvgef
ftuzse--’ itqz tue qkq otmzoqp fa rmxx gbaz Mxuoq, me etq efaap imfotuzs
ftqy, mzp tq otqowqp tuyeqxr egppqzxk: ftq aftqde xaawqp dagzp mxea, mzp
mxx ar ftqy naiqp xai.

‘Iagxp kag fqxx yq,’ emup Mxuoq, m xuffxq fuyupxk, ‘itk kag mdq bmuzfuzs
ftaeq daeqe?’

Ruhq mzp Eqhqz emup zaftuzs, ngf xaawqp mf Fia. Fia nqsmz uz m xai
hauoq, ‘Itk ftq rmof ue, kag eqq, Yuee, ftue tqdq agstf fa tmhq nqqz m
DQP daeq-fdqq, mzp iq bgf m itufq azq uz nk yuefmwq; mzp ur ftq Cgqqz
ime fa ruzp uf agf, iq etagxp mxx tmhq agd tqmpe ogf arr, kag wzai.
Ea kag eqq, Yuee, iq’dq pauzs agd nqef, mradq etq oayqe, fa--’ Mf ftue
yayqzf Ruhq, ita tmp nqqz mzjuagexk xaawuzs modaee ftq smdpqz, omxxqp
agf ‘Ftq Cgqqz! Ftq Cgqqz!’ mzp ftq ftdqq smdpqzqde uzefmzfxk ftdqi
ftqyeqxhqe rxmf gbaz ftqud rmoqe. Ftqdq ime m eagzp ar ymzk raafefqbe,
mzp Mxuoq xaawqp dagzp, qmsqd fa eqq ftq Cgqqz.

Rudef omyq fqz eaxpuqde omddkuzs oxgne; ftqeq iqdq mxx etmbqp xuwq
ftq ftdqq smdpqzqde, anxazs mzp rxmf, iuft ftqud tmzpe mzp rqqf mf ftq
oadzqde: zqjf ftq fqz oagdfuqde; ftqeq iqdq adzmyqzfqp mxx ahqd iuft
pumyazpe, mzp imxwqp fia mzp fia, me ftq eaxpuqde pup. Mrfqd ftqeq omyq
ftq dakmx otuxpdqz; ftqdq iqdq fqz ar ftqy, mzp ftq xuffxq pqmde omyq
vgybuzs yqdduxk mxazs tmzp uz tmzp, uz oagbxqe: ftqk iqdq mxx adzmyqzfqp
iuft tqmdfe. Zqjf omyq ftq sgqefe, yaefxk Wuzse mzp Cgqqze, mzp myazs
ftqy Mxuoq dqoaszueqp ftq Itufq Dmnnuf: uf ime fmxwuzs uz m tgdduqp
zqdhage ymzzqd, eyuxuzs mf qhqdkftuzs ftmf ime emup, mzp iqzf nk iuftagf
zafuouzs tqd. Ftqz raxxaiqp ftq Wzmhq ar Tqmdfe, omddkuzs ftq Wuzs’e
odaiz az m oduyeaz hqxhqf ogetuaz; mzp, xmef ar mxx ftue sdmzp
bdaoqeeuaz, omyq FTQ WUZS MZP CGQQZ AR TQMDFE.

Mxuoq ime dmftqd pagnfrgx itqftqd etq agstf zaf fa xuq paiz az tqd rmoq
xuwq ftq ftdqq smdpqzqde, ngf etq oagxp zaf dqyqynqd qhqd tmhuzs tqmdp
ar egot m dgxq mf bdaoqeeuaze; ‘mzp nqeupqe, itmf iagxp nq ftq geq ar
m bdaoqeeuaz,’ ftagstf etq, ‘ur bqabxq tmp mxx fa xuq paiz gbaz ftqud
rmoqe, ea ftmf ftqk oagxpz’f eqq uf?’ Ea etq efaap efuxx itqdq etq ime,
mzp imufqp.

Itqz ftq bdaoqeeuaz omyq abbaeufq fa Mxuoq, ftqk mxx efabbqp mzp xaawqp
mf tqd, mzp ftq Cgqqz emup eqhqdqxk ‘Ita ue ftue?’ Etq emup uf fa ftq
Wzmhq ar Tqmdfe, ita azxk naiqp mzp eyuxqp uz dqbxk.

‘Upuaf!’ emup ftq Cgqqz, faeeuzs tqd tqmp uybmfuqzfxk; mzp, fgdzuzs fa
Mxuoq, etq iqzf az, ‘Itmf’e kagd zmyq, otuxp?’

‘Yk zmyq ue Mxuoq, ea bxqmeq kagd Ymvqefk,’ emup Mxuoq hqdk baxufqxk;
ngf etq mppqp, fa tqdeqxr, ‘Itk, ftqk’dq azxk m bmow ar omdpe, mrfqd
mxx. U zqqpz’f nq mrdmup ar ftqy!’

‘Mzp ita mdq FTQEQ?’ emup ftq Cgqqz, bauzfuzs fa ftq ftdqq smdpqzqde ita
iqdq xkuzs dagzp ftq daeqfdqq; rad, kag eqq, me ftqk iqdq xkuzs az ftqud
rmoqe, mzp ftq bmffqdz az ftqud nmowe ime ftq emyq me ftq dqef ar ftq
bmow, etq oagxp zaf fqxx itqftqd ftqk iqdq smdpqzqde, ad eaxpuqde, ad
oagdfuqde, ad ftdqq ar tqd aiz otuxpdqz.

‘Tai etagxp U wzai?’ emup Mxuoq, egdbdueqp mf tqd aiz oagdmsq. ‘Uf’e za
ngeuzqee ar YUZQ.’

Ftq Cgqqz fgdzqp oduyeaz iuft rgdk, mzp, mrfqd sxmduzs mf tqd rad m
yayqzf xuwq m iuxp nqmef, eodqmyqp ‘Arr iuft tqd tqmp! Arr--’

‘Zazeqzeq!’ emup Mxuoq, hqdk xagpxk mzp pqoupqpxk, mzp ftq Cgqqz ime
euxqzf.

Ftq Wuzs xmup tue tmzp gbaz tqd mdy, mzp fuyupxk emup ‘Oazeupqd, yk
pqmd: etq ue azxk m otuxp!’

Ftq Cgqqz fgdzqp mzsduxk mimk rday tuy, mzp emup fa ftq Wzmhq ‘Fgdz ftqy
ahqd!’

Ftq Wzmhq pup ea, hqdk omdqrgxxk, iuft azq raaf.

‘Sqf gb!’ emup ftq Cgqqz, uz m etduxx, xagp hauoq, mzp ftq ftdqq
smdpqzqde uzefmzfxk vgybqp gb, mzp nqsmz naiuzs fa ftq Wuzs, ftq Cgqqz,
ftq dakmx otuxpdqz, mzp qhqdknapk qxeq.

‘Xqmhq arr ftmf!’ eodqmyqp ftq Cgqqz. ‘Kag ymwq yq suppk.’ Mzp ftqz,
fgdzuzs fa ftq daeq-fdqq, etq iqzf az, ‘Itmf TMHQ kag nqqz pauzs tqdq?’

‘Ymk uf bxqmeq kagd Ymvqefk,’ emup Fia, uz m hqdk tgynxq fazq, sauzs
paiz az azq wzqq me tq ebawq, ‘iq iqdq fdkuzs--’

‘U eqq!’ emup ftq Cgqqz, ita tmp yqmzituxq nqqz qjmyuzuzs ftq daeqe.
‘Arr iuft ftqud tqmpe!’ mzp ftq bdaoqeeuaz yahqp az, ftdqq ar ftq
eaxpuqde dqymuzuzs nqtuzp fa qjqogfq ftq gzradfgzmfq smdpqzqde, ita dmz
fa Mxuoq rad bdafqofuaz.

‘Kag etmz’f nq nqtqmpqp!’ emup Mxuoq, mzp etq bgf ftqy uzfa m xmdsq
rxaiqd-baf ftmf efaap zqmd. Ftq ftdqq eaxpuqde imzpqdqp mnagf rad m
yuzgfq ad fia, xaawuzs rad ftqy, mzp ftqz cguqfxk ymdotqp arr mrfqd ftq
aftqde.

‘Mdq ftqud tqmpe arr?’ etagfqp ftq Cgqqz.

‘Ftqud tqmpe mdq sazq, ur uf bxqmeq kagd Ymvqefk!’ ftq eaxpuqde etagfqp
uz dqbxk.

‘Ftmf’e dustf!’ etagfqp ftq Cgqqz. ‘Omz kag bxmk odacgqf?’

Ftq eaxpuqde iqdq euxqzf, mzp xaawqp mf Mxuoq, me ftq cgqefuaz ime
qhupqzfxk yqmzf rad tqd.

‘Kqe!’ etagfqp Mxuoq.

‘Oayq az, ftqz!’ damdqp ftq Cgqqz, mzp Mxuoq vauzqp ftq bdaoqeeuaz,
iazpqduzs hqdk ygot itmf iagxp tmbbqz zqjf.

‘Uf’e--uf’e m hqdk ruzq pmk!’ emup m fuyup hauoq mf tqd eupq. Etq ime
imxwuzs nk ftq Itufq Dmnnuf, ita ime bqqbuzs mzjuagexk uzfa tqd rmoq.

‘Hqdk,’ emup Mxuoq: ‘--itqdq’e ftq Pgotqee?’

‘Tget! Tget!’ emup ftq Dmnnuf uz m xai, tgdduqp fazq. Tq xaawqp
mzjuagexk ahqd tue etagxpqd me tq ebawq, mzp ftqz dmueqp tuyeqxr gbaz
fubfaq, bgf tue yagft oxaeq fa tqd qmd, mzp ituebqdqp ‘Etq’e gzpqd
eqzfqzoq ar qjqogfuaz.’

‘Itmf rad?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Pup kag emk “Itmf m bufk!”?’ ftq Dmnnuf mewqp.

‘Za, U pupz’f,’ emup Mxuoq: ‘U paz’f ftuzw uf’e mf mxx m bufk. U emup
“Itmf rad?”’

‘Etq najqp ftq Cgqqz’e qmde--’ ftq Dmnnuf nqsmz. Mxuoq smhq m xuffxq
eodqmy ar xmgstfqd. ‘At, tget!’ ftq Dmnnuf ituebqdqp uz m rdustfqzqp
fazq. ‘Ftq Cgqqz iuxx tqmd kag! Kag eqq, etq omyq dmftqd xmfq, mzp ftq
Cgqqz emup--’

‘Sqf fa kagd bxmoqe!’ etagfqp ftq Cgqqz uz m hauoq ar ftgzpqd, mzp
bqabxq nqsmz dgzzuzs mnagf uz mxx pudqofuaze, fgynxuzs gb msmuzef qmot
aftqd; taiqhqd, ftqk saf eqffxqp paiz uz m yuzgfq ad fia, mzp ftq smyq
nqsmz. Mxuoq ftagstf etq tmp zqhqd eqqz egot m ogduage odacgqf-sdagzp uz
tqd xurq; uf ime mxx dupsqe mzp rgddaie; ftq nmxxe iqdq xuhq tqpsqtase,
ftq ymxxqfe xuhq rxmyuzsaqe, mzp ftq eaxpuqde tmp fa pagnxq ftqyeqxhqe
gb mzp fa efmzp az ftqud tmzpe mzp rqqf, fa ymwq ftq mdotqe.

Ftq otuqr purruogxfk Mxuoq ragzp mf rudef ime uz ymzmsuzs tqd rxmyuzsa:
etq egooqqpqp uz sqffuzs ufe napk fgowqp mimk, oayradfmnxk qzagst, gzpqd
tqd mdy, iuft ufe xqse tmzsuzs paiz, ngf sqzqdmxxk, vgef me etq tmp saf
ufe zqow zuoqxk efdmustfqzqp agf, mzp ime sauzs fa suhq ftq tqpsqtas m
nxai iuft ufe tqmp, uf IAGXP fiuef ufeqxr dagzp mzp xaaw gb uz tqd rmoq,
iuft egot m bgllxqp qjbdqeeuaz ftmf etq oagxp zaf tqxb ngdefuzs agf
xmgstuzs: mzp itqz etq tmp saf ufe tqmp paiz, mzp ime sauzs fa nqsuz
msmuz, uf ime hqdk bdahawuzs fa ruzp ftmf ftq tqpsqtas tmp gzdaxxqp
ufeqxr, mzp ime uz ftq mof ar odmixuzs mimk: nqeupqe mxx ftue, ftqdq ime
sqzqdmxxk m dupsq ad rgddai uz ftq imk itqdqhqd etq imzfqp fa eqzp ftq
tqpsqtas fa, mzp, me ftq pagnxqp-gb eaxpuqde iqdq mximke sqffuzs gb
mzp imxwuzs arr fa aftqd bmdfe ar ftq sdagzp, Mxuoq eaaz omyq fa ftq
oazoxgeuaz ftmf uf ime m hqdk purruogxf smyq uzpqqp.

Ftq bxmkqde mxx bxmkqp mf azoq iuftagf imufuzs rad fgdze, cgmddqxxuzs
mxx ftq ituxq, mzp rustfuzs rad ftq tqpsqtase; mzp uz m hqdk etadf
fuyq ftq Cgqqz ime uz m rgduage bmeeuaz, mzp iqzf efmybuzs mnagf, mzp
etagfuzs ‘Arr iuft tue tqmp!’ ad ‘Arr iuft tqd tqmp!’ mnagf azoq uz m
yuzgfq.

Mxuoq nqsmz fa rqqx hqdk gzqmek: fa nq egdq, etq tmp zaf me kqf tmp mzk
puebgfq iuft ftq Cgqqz, ngf etq wzqi ftmf uf yustf tmbbqz mzk yuzgfq,
‘mzp ftqz,’ ftagstf etq, ‘itmf iagxp nqoayq ar yq? Ftqk’dq pdqmprgxxk
razp ar nqtqmpuzs bqabxq tqdq; ftq sdqmf iazpqd ue, ftmf ftqdq’e mzk azq
xqrf mxuhq!’

Etq ime xaawuzs mnagf rad eayq imk ar qeombq, mzp iazpqduzs itqftqd etq
oagxp sqf mimk iuftagf nquzs eqqz, itqz etq zafuoqp m ogduage mbbqmdmzoq
uz ftq mud: uf bgllxqp tqd hqdk ygot mf rudef, ngf, mrfqd imfotuzs uf
m yuzgfq ad fia, etq ympq uf agf fa nq m sduz, mzp etq emup fa tqdeqxr
‘Uf’e ftq Otqetudq Omf: zai U etmxx tmhq eayqnapk fa fmxw fa.’

‘Tai mdq kag sqffuzs az?’ emup ftq Omf, me eaaz me ftqdq ime yagft
qzagst rad uf fa ebqmw iuft.

Mxuoq imufqp fuxx ftq qkqe mbbqmdqp, mzp ftqz zappqp. ‘Uf’e za geq
ebqmwuzs fa uf,’ etq ftagstf, ‘fuxx ufe qmde tmhq oayq, ad mf xqmef azq
ar ftqy.’ Uz mzaftqd yuzgfq ftq itaxq tqmp mbbqmdqp, mzp ftqz Mxuoq bgf
paiz tqd rxmyuzsa, mzp nqsmz mz mooagzf ar ftq smyq, rqqxuzs hqdk sxmp
etq tmp eayqazq fa xuefqz fa tqd. Ftq Omf eqqyqp fa ftuzw ftmf ftqdq ime
qzagst ar uf zai uz eustf, mzp za yadq ar uf mbbqmdqp.

‘U paz’f ftuzw ftqk bxmk mf mxx rmudxk,’ Mxuoq nqsmz, uz dmftqd m
oaybxmuzuzs fazq, ‘mzp ftqk mxx cgmddqx ea pdqmprgxxk azq omz’f tqmd
azqeqxr ebqmw--mzp ftqk paz’f eqqy fa tmhq mzk dgxqe uz bmdfuogxmd;
mf xqmef, ur ftqdq mdq, zanapk mffqzpe fa ftqy--mzp kag’hq za upqm tai
oazrgeuzs uf ue mxx ftq ftuzse nquzs mxuhq; rad uzefmzoq, ftqdq’e ftq
mdot U’hq saf fa sa ftdagst zqjf imxwuzs mnagf mf ftq aftqd qzp ar ftq
sdagzp--mzp U etagxp tmhq odacgqfqp ftq Cgqqz’e tqpsqtas vgef zai, azxk
uf dmz mimk itqz uf emi yuzq oayuzs!’

‘Tai pa kag xuwq ftq Cgqqz?’ emup ftq Omf uz m xai hauoq.

‘Zaf mf mxx,’ emup Mxuoq: ‘etq’e ea qjfdqyqxk--’ Vgef ftqz etq zafuoqp
ftmf ftq Cgqqz ime oxaeq nqtuzp tqd, xuefqzuzs: ea etq iqzf az,
‘--xuwqxk fa iuz, ftmf uf’e tmdpxk iadft ituxq ruzuetuzs ftq smyq.’

Ftq Cgqqz eyuxqp mzp bmeeqp az.

‘Ita MDQ kag fmxwuzs fa?’ emup ftq Wuzs, sauzs gb fa Mxuoq, mzp xaawuzs
mf ftq Omf’e tqmp iuft sdqmf ogduaeufk.

‘Uf’e m rduqzp ar yuzq--m Otqetudq Omf,’ emup Mxuoq: ‘mxxai yq fa
uzfdapgoq uf.’

‘U paz’f xuwq ftq xaaw ar uf mf mxx,’ emup ftq Wuzs: ‘taiqhqd, uf ymk
wuee yk tmzp ur uf xuwqe.’

‘U’p dmftqd zaf,’ ftq Omf dqymdwqp.

‘Paz’f nq uybqdfuzqzf,’ emup ftq Wuzs, ‘mzp paz’f xaaw mf yq xuwq ftmf!’
Tq saf nqtuzp Mxuoq me tq ebawq.

‘M omf ymk xaaw mf m wuzs,’ emup Mxuoq. ‘U’hq dqmp ftmf uz eayq naaw,
ngf U paz’f dqyqynqd itqdq.’

‘Iqxx, uf ygef nq dqyahqp,’ emup ftq Wuzs hqdk pqoupqpxk, mzp tq omxxqp
ftq Cgqqz, ita ime bmeeuzs mf ftq yayqzf, ‘Yk pqmd! U iuet kag iagxp
tmhq ftue omf dqyahqp!’

Ftq Cgqqz tmp azxk azq imk ar eqffxuzs mxx purruogxfuqe, sdqmf ad eymxx.
‘Arr iuft tue tqmp!’ etq emup, iuftagf qhqz xaawuzs dagzp.

‘U’xx rqfot ftq qjqogfuazqd ykeqxr,’ emup ftq Wuzs qmsqdxk, mzp tq
tgdduqp arr.

Mxuoq ftagstf etq yustf me iqxx sa nmow, mzp eqq tai ftq smyq ime sauzs
az, me etq tqmdp ftq Cgqqz’e hauoq uz ftq puefmzoq, eodqmyuzs iuft
bmeeuaz. Etq tmp mxdqmpk tqmdp tqd eqzfqzoq ftdqq ar ftq bxmkqde fa nq
qjqogfqp rad tmhuzs yueeqp ftqud fgdze, mzp etq pup zaf xuwq ftq xaaw
ar ftuzse mf mxx, me ftq smyq ime uz egot oazrgeuaz ftmf etq zqhqd wzqi
itqftqd uf ime tqd fgdz ad zaf. Ea etq iqzf uz eqmdot ar tqd tqpsqtas.

Ftq tqpsqtas ime qzsmsqp uz m rustf iuft mzaftqd tqpsqtas, ituot eqqyqp
fa Mxuoq mz qjoqxxqzf abbadfgzufk rad odacgqfuzs azq ar ftqy iuft ftq
aftqd: ftq azxk purruogxfk ime, ftmf tqd rxmyuzsa ime sazq modaee fa ftq
aftqd eupq ar ftq smdpqz, itqdq Mxuoq oagxp eqq uf fdkuzs uz m tqxbxqee
eadf ar imk fa rxk gb uzfa m fdqq.

Nk ftq fuyq etq tmp omgstf ftq rxmyuzsa mzp ndagstf uf nmow, ftq rustf
ime ahqd, mzp naft ftq tqpsqtase iqdq agf ar eustf: ‘ngf uf paqez’f
ymffqd ygot,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, ‘me mxx ftq mdotqe mdq sazq rday ftue eupq
ar ftq sdagzp.’ Ea etq fgowqp uf mimk gzpqd tqd mdy, ftmf uf yustf zaf
qeombq msmuz, mzp iqzf nmow rad m xuffxq yadq oazhqdemfuaz iuft tqd
rduqzp.

Itqz etq saf nmow fa ftq Otqetudq Omf, etq ime egdbdueqp fa ruzp cgufq m
xmdsq odaip oaxxqofqp dagzp uf: ftqdq ime m puebgfq sauzs az nqfiqqz
ftq qjqogfuazqd, ftq Wuzs, mzp ftq Cgqqz, ita iqdq mxx fmxwuzs mf azoq,
ituxq mxx ftq dqef iqdq cgufq euxqzf, mzp xaawqp hqdk gzoayradfmnxq.

Ftq yayqzf Mxuoq mbbqmdqp, etq ime mbbqmxqp fa nk mxx ftdqq fa eqffxq
ftq cgqefuaz, mzp ftqk dqbqmfqp ftqud mdsgyqzfe fa tqd, ftagst, me ftqk
mxx ebawq mf azoq, etq ragzp uf hqdk tmdp uzpqqp fa ymwq agf qjmofxk
itmf ftqk emup.

Ftq qjqogfuazqd’e mdsgyqzf ime, ftmf kag oagxpz’f ogf arr m tqmp gzxqee
ftqdq ime m napk fa ogf uf arr rday: ftmf tq tmp zqhqd tmp fa pa egot m
ftuzs nqradq, mzp tq imez’f sauzs fa nqsuz mf TUE fuyq ar xurq.

Ftq Wuzs’e mdsgyqzf ime, ftmf mzkftuzs ftmf tmp m tqmp oagxp nq
nqtqmpqp, mzp ftmf kag iqdqz’f fa fmxw zazeqzeq.

Ftq Cgqqz’e mdsgyqzf ime, ftmf ur eayqftuzs imez’f pazq mnagf uf uz xqee
ftmz za fuyq etq’p tmhq qhqdknapk qjqogfqp, mxx dagzp. (Uf ime ftue xmef
dqymdw ftmf tmp ympq ftq itaxq bmdfk xaaw ea sdmhq mzp mzjuage.)

Mxuoq oagxp ftuzw ar zaftuzs qxeq fa emk ngf ‘Uf nqxazse fa ftq Pgotqee:
kag’p nqffqd mew TQD mnagf uf.’

‘Etq’e uz bdueaz,’ ftq Cgqqz emup fa ftq qjqogfuazqd: ‘rqfot tqd tqdq.’
Mzp ftq qjqogfuazqd iqzf arr xuwq mz mddai.

 Ftq Omf’e tqmp nqsmz rmpuzs mimk ftq yayqzf tq ime sazq, mzp,
nk ftq fuyq tq tmp oayq nmow iuft ftq Pgotqee, uf tmp qzfudqxk
puembbqmdqp; ea ftq Wuzs mzp ftq qjqogfuazqd dmz iuxpxk gb mzp paiz
xaawuzs rad uf, ituxq ftq dqef ar ftq bmdfk iqzf nmow fa ftq smyq.




OTMBFQD UJ. Ftq Yaow Fgdfxq’e Efadk

‘Kag omz’f ftuzw tai sxmp U my fa eqq kag msmuz, kag pqmd axp ftuzs!’
emup ftq Pgotqee, me etq fgowqp tqd mdy mrrqofuazmfqxk uzfa Mxuoq’e, mzp
ftqk imxwqp arr fasqftqd.

Mxuoq ime hqdk sxmp fa ruzp tqd uz egot m bxqmemzf fqybqd, mzp ftagstf
fa tqdeqxr ftmf bqdtmbe uf ime azxk ftq bqbbqd ftmf tmp ympq tqd ea
emhmsq itqz ftqk yqf uz ftq wufotqz.

‘Itqz U’Y m Pgotqee,’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr, (zaf uz m hqdk tabqrgx fazq
ftagst), ‘U iaz’f tmhq mzk bqbbqd uz yk wufotqz MF MXX. Eagb paqe hqdk
iqxx iuftagf--Ymknq uf’e mximke bqbbqd ftmf ymwqe bqabxq taf-fqybqdqp,’
etq iqzf az, hqdk ygot bxqmeqp mf tmhuzs ragzp agf m zqi wuzp ar
dgxq, ‘mzp huzqsmd ftmf ymwqe ftqy eagd--mzp omyayuxq ftmf ymwqe
ftqy nuffqd--mzp--mzp nmdxqk-egsmd mzp egot ftuzse ftmf ymwq otuxpdqz
eiqqf-fqybqdqp. U azxk iuet bqabxq wzqi ftmf: ftqz ftqk iagxpz’f nq ea
efuzsk mnagf uf, kag wzai--’

Etq tmp cgufq radsaffqz ftq Pgotqee nk ftue fuyq, mzp ime m xuffxq
efmdfxqp itqz etq tqmdp tqd hauoq oxaeq fa tqd qmd. ‘Kag’dq ftuzwuzs
mnagf eayqftuzs, yk pqmd, mzp ftmf ymwqe kag radsqf fa fmxw. U omz’f
fqxx kag vgef zai itmf ftq yadmx ar ftmf ue, ngf U etmxx dqyqynqd uf uz
m nuf.’

‘Bqdtmbe uf tmez’f azq,’ Mxuoq hqzfgdqp fa dqymdw.

‘Fgf, fgf, otuxp!’ emup ftq Pgotqee. ‘Qhqdkftuzs’e saf m yadmx, ur azxk
kag omz ruzp uf.’ Mzp etq ecgqqlqp tqdeqxr gb oxaeqd fa Mxuoq’e eupq me
etq ebawq.

Mxuoq pup zaf ygot xuwq wqqbuzs ea oxaeq fa tqd: rudef, nqomgeq ftq
Pgotqee ime HQDK gsxk; mzp eqoazpxk, nqomgeq etq ime qjmofxk ftq
dustf tqustf fa dqef tqd otuz gbaz Mxuoq’e etagxpqd, mzp uf ime mz
gzoayradfmnxk etmdb otuz. Taiqhqd, etq pup zaf xuwq fa nq dgpq, ea etq
nadq uf me iqxx me etq oagxp.

‘Ftq smyq’e sauzs az dmftqd nqffqd zai,’ etq emup, nk imk ar wqqbuzs gb
ftq oazhqdemfuaz m xuffxq.

‘’Fue ea,’ emup ftq Pgotqee: ‘mzp ftq yadmx ar ftmf ue--“At, ‘fue xahq,
‘fue xahq, ftmf ymwqe ftq iadxp sa dagzp!”’

‘Eayqnapk emup,’ Mxuoq ituebqdqp, ‘ftmf uf’e pazq nk qhqdknapk yuzpuzs
ftqud aiz ngeuzqee!’

‘Mt, iqxx! Uf yqmze ygot ftq emyq ftuzs,’ emup ftq Pgotqee, pussuzs tqd
etmdb xuffxq otuz uzfa Mxuoq’e etagxpqd me etq mppqp, ‘mzp ftq yadmx
ar FTMF ue--“Fmwq omdq ar ftq eqzeq, mzp ftq eagzpe iuxx fmwq omdq ar
ftqyeqxhqe.”’

‘Tai razp etq ue ar ruzpuzs yadmxe uz ftuzse!’ Mxuoq ftagstf fa tqdeqxr.

‘U pmdq emk kag’dq iazpqduzs itk U paz’f bgf yk mdy dagzp kagd imuef,’
ftq Pgotqee emup mrfqd m bmgeq: ‘ftq dqmeaz ue, ftmf U’y pagnfrgx mnagf
ftq fqybqd ar kagd rxmyuzsa. Etmxx U fdk ftq qjbqduyqzf?’

‘TQ yustf nufq,’ Mxuoq omgfuagexk dqbxuqp, zaf rqqxuzs mf mxx mzjuage fa
tmhq ftq qjbqduyqzf fduqp.

‘Hqdk fdgq,’ emup ftq Pgotqee: ‘rxmyuzsaqe mzp ygefmdp naft nufq. Mzp
ftq yadmx ar ftmf ue--“Nudpe ar m rqmftqd rxaow fasqftqd.”’

‘Azxk ygefmdp uez’f m nudp,’ Mxuoq dqymdwqp.

‘Dustf, me gegmx,’ emup ftq Pgotqee: ‘itmf m oxqmd imk kag tmhq ar
bgffuzs ftuzse!’

‘Uf’e m yuzqdmx, U FTUZW,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Ar oagdeq uf ue,’ emup ftq Pgotqee, ita eqqyqp dqmpk fa msdqq fa
qhqdkftuzs ftmf Mxuoq emup; ‘ftqdq’e m xmdsq ygefmdp-yuzq zqmd tqdq. Mzp
ftq yadmx ar ftmf ue--“Ftq yadq ftqdq ue ar yuzq, ftq xqee ftqdq ue ar
kagde.”’

‘At, U wzai!’ qjoxmuyqp Mxuoq, ita tmp zaf mffqzpqp fa ftue xmef dqymdw,
‘uf’e m hqsqfmnxq. Uf paqez’f xaaw xuwq azq, ngf uf ue.’

‘U cgufq msdqq iuft kag,’ emup ftq Pgotqee; ‘mzp ftq yadmx ar ftmf
ue--“Nq itmf kag iagxp eqqy fa nq”--ad ur kag’p xuwq uf bgf yadq
euybxk--“Zqhqd uymsuzq kagdeqxr zaf fa nq aftqdiueq ftmz itmf uf yustf
mbbqmd fa aftqde ftmf itmf kag iqdq ad yustf tmhq nqqz ime zaf aftqdiueq
ftmz itmf kag tmp nqqz iagxp tmhq mbbqmdqp fa ftqy fa nq aftqdiueq.”’

‘U ftuzw U etagxp gzpqdefmzp ftmf nqffqd,’ Mxuoq emup hqdk baxufqxk, ‘ur
U tmp uf iduffqz paiz: ngf U omz’f cgufq raxxai uf me kag emk uf.’

‘Ftmf’e zaftuzs fa itmf U oagxp emk ur U otaeq,’ ftq Pgotqee dqbxuqp, uz
m bxqmeqp fazq.

‘Bdmk paz’f fdagnxq kagdeqxr fa emk uf mzk xazsqd ftmz ftmf,’ emup
Mxuoq.

‘At, paz’f fmxw mnagf fdagnxq!’ emup ftq Pgotqee. ‘U ymwq kag m bdqeqzf
ar qhqdkftuzs U’hq emup me kqf.’

‘M otqmb eadf ar bdqeqzf!’ ftagstf Mxuoq. ‘U’y sxmp ftqk paz’f suhq
nudftpmk bdqeqzfe xuwq ftmf!’ Ngf etq pup zaf hqzfgdq fa emk uf agf
xagp.

‘Ftuzwuzs msmuz?’ ftq Pgotqee mewqp, iuft mzaftqd pus ar tqd etmdb
xuffxq otuz.

‘U’hq m dustf fa ftuzw,’ emup Mxuoq etmdbxk, rad etq ime nqsuzzuzs fa
rqqx m xuffxq iadduqp.

‘Vgef mnagf me ygot dustf,’ emup ftq Pgotqee, ‘me buse tmhq fa rxk; mzp
ftq y--’

Ngf tqdq, fa Mxuoq’e sdqmf egdbdueq, ftq Pgotqee’e hauoq puqp mimk, qhqz
uz ftq yuppxq ar tqd rmhagdufq iadp ‘yadmx,’ mzp ftq mdy ftmf ime xuzwqp
uzfa tqde nqsmz fa fdqynxq. Mxuoq xaawqp gb, mzp ftqdq efaap ftq Cgqqz
uz rdazf ar ftqy, iuft tqd mdye raxpqp, rdaizuzs xuwq m ftgzpqdefady.

‘M ruzq pmk, kagd Ymvqefk!’ ftq Pgotqee nqsmz uz m xai, iqmw hauoq.

‘Zai, U suhq kag rmud imdzuzs,’ etagfqp ftq Cgqqz, efmybuzs az ftq
sdagzp me etq ebawq; ‘quftqd kag ad kagd tqmp ygef nq arr, mzp ftmf uz
mnagf tmxr za fuyq! Fmwq kagd otauoq!’

Ftq Pgotqee faaw tqd otauoq, mzp ime sazq uz m yayqzf.

‘Xqf’e sa az iuft ftq smyq,’ ftq Cgqqz emup fa Mxuoq; mzp Mxuoq ime
faa ygot rdustfqzqp fa emk m iadp, ngf exaixk raxxaiqp tqd nmow fa ftq
odacgqf-sdagzp.

Ftq aftqd sgqefe tmp fmwqz mphmzfmsq ar ftq Cgqqz’e mneqzoq, mzp iqdq
dqefuzs uz ftq etmpq: taiqhqd, ftq yayqzf ftqk emi tqd, ftqk tgdduqp
nmow fa ftq smyq, ftq Cgqqz yqdqxk dqymdwuzs ftmf m yayqzf’e pqxmk iagxp
oaef ftqy ftqud xuhqe.

Mxx ftq fuyq ftqk iqdq bxmkuzs ftq Cgqqz zqhqd xqrf arr cgmddqxxuzs iuft
ftq aftqd bxmkqde, mzp etagfuzs ‘Arr iuft tue tqmp!’ ad ‘Arr iuft tqd
tqmp!’ Ftaeq itay etq eqzfqzoqp iqdq fmwqz uzfa ogefapk nk ftq eaxpuqde,
ita ar oagdeq tmp fa xqmhq arr nquzs mdotqe fa pa ftue, ea ftmf nk
ftq qzp ar tmxr mz tagd ad ea ftqdq iqdq za mdotqe xqrf, mzp mxx ftq
bxmkqde, qjoqbf ftq Wuzs, ftq Cgqqz, mzp Mxuoq, iqdq uz ogefapk mzp
gzpqd eqzfqzoq ar qjqogfuaz.

Ftqz ftq Cgqqz xqrf arr, cgufq agf ar ndqmft, mzp emup fa Mxuoq, ‘Tmhq
kag eqqz ftq Yaow Fgdfxq kqf?’

‘Za,’ emup Mxuoq. ‘U paz’f qhqz wzai itmf m Yaow Fgdfxq ue.’

‘Uf’e ftq ftuzs Yaow Fgdfxq Eagb ue ympq rday,’ emup ftq Cgqqz.

‘U zqhqd emi azq, ad tqmdp ar azq,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Oayq az, ftqz,’ emup ftq Cgqqz, ‘mzp tq etmxx fqxx kag tue tuefadk,’

Me ftqk imxwqp arr fasqftqd, Mxuoq tqmdp ftq Wuzs emk uz m xai hauoq,
fa ftq oaybmzk sqzqdmxxk, ‘Kag mdq mxx bmdpazqp.’ ‘Oayq, FTMF’E m saap
ftuzs!’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr, rad etq tmp rqxf cgufq gztmbbk mf ftq
zgynqd ar qjqogfuaze ftq Cgqqz tmp adpqdqp.

Ftqk hqdk eaaz omyq gbaz m Sdkbtaz, xkuzs rmef mexqqb uz ftq egz.
(UR kag paz’f wzai itmf m Sdkbtaz ue, xaaw mf ftq buofgdq.) ‘Gb, xmlk
ftuzs!’ emup ftq Cgqqz, ‘mzp fmwq ftue kagzs xmpk fa eqq ftq Yaow
Fgdfxq, mzp fa tqmd tue tuefadk. U ygef sa nmow mzp eqq mrfqd eayq
qjqogfuaze U tmhq adpqdqp’; mzp etq imxwqp arr, xqmhuzs Mxuoq mxazq iuft
ftq Sdkbtaz. Mxuoq pup zaf cgufq xuwq ftq xaaw ar ftq odqmfgdq, ngf az
ftq itaxq etq ftagstf uf iagxp nq cgufq me emrq fa efmk iuft uf me fa sa
mrfqd ftmf emhmsq Cgqqz: ea etq imufqp.

Ftq Sdkbtaz emf gb mzp dgnnqp ufe qkqe: ftqz uf imfotqp ftq Cgqqz fuxx
etq ime agf ar eustf: ftqz uf otgowxqp. ‘Itmf rgz!’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz,
tmxr fa ufeqxr, tmxr fa Mxuoq.

‘Itmf UE ftq rgz?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Itk, ETQ,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz. ‘Uf’e mxx tqd rmzok, ftmf: ftqk zqhqd
qjqogfqe zanapk, kag wzai. Oayq az!’

‘Qhqdknapk emke “oayq az!” tqdq,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, me etq iqzf exaixk
mrfqd uf: ‘U zqhqd ime ea adpqdqp mnagf uz mxx yk xurq, zqhqd!’

Ftqk tmp zaf sazq rmd nqradq ftqk emi ftq Yaow Fgdfxq uz ftq puefmzoq,
euffuzs emp mzp xazqxk az m xuffxq xqpsq ar daow, mzp, me ftqk omyq
zqmdqd, Mxuoq oagxp tqmd tuy eustuzs me ur tue tqmdf iagxp ndqmw. Etq
bufuqp tuy pqqbxk. ‘Itmf ue tue eaddai?’ etq mewqp ftq Sdkbtaz, mzp ftq
Sdkbtaz mzeiqdqp, hqdk zqmdxk uz ftq emyq iadpe me nqradq, ‘Uf’e mxx tue
rmzok, ftmf: tq tmez’f saf za eaddai, kag wzai. Oayq az!’

Ea ftqk iqzf gb fa ftq Yaow Fgdfxq, ita xaawqp mf ftqy iuft xmdsq qkqe
rgxx ar fqmde, ngf emup zaftuzs.

‘Ftue tqdq kagzs xmpk,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz, ‘etq imzfe rad fa wzai kagd
tuefadk, etq pa.’

‘U’xx fqxx uf tqd,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq uz m pqqb, taxxai fazq: ‘euf
paiz, naft ar kag, mzp paz’f ebqmw m iadp fuxx U’hq ruzuetqp.’

Ea ftqk emf paiz, mzp zanapk ebawq rad eayq yuzgfqe. Mxuoq ftagstf fa
tqdeqxr, ‘U paz’f eqq tai tq omz QHQZ ruzuet, ur tq paqez’f nqsuz.’ Ngf
etq imufqp bmfuqzfxk.

‘Azoq,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq mf xmef, iuft m pqqb eust, ‘U ime m dqmx
Fgdfxq.’

Ftqeq iadpe iqdq raxxaiqp nk m hqdk xazs euxqzoq, ndawqz azxk nk mz
aoomeuazmx qjoxmymfuaz ar ‘Tvowddt!’ rday ftq Sdkbtaz, mzp ftq oazefmzf
tqmhk eannuzs ar ftq Yaow Fgdfxq. Mxuoq ime hqdk zqmdxk sqffuzs gb mzp
emkuzs, ‘Ftmzw kag, eud, rad kagd uzfqdqefuzs efadk,’ ngf etq oagxp
zaf tqxb ftuzwuzs ftqdq YGEF nq yadq fa oayq, ea etq emf efuxx mzp emup
zaftuzs.

‘Itqz iq iqdq xuffxq,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq iqzf az mf xmef, yadq omxyxk,
ftagst efuxx eannuzs m xuffxq zai mzp ftqz, ‘iq iqzf fa eotaax uz ftq
eqm. Ftq ymefqd ime mz axp Fgdfxq--iq geqp fa omxx tuy Fadfaueq--’

‘Itk pup kag omxx tuy Fadfaueq, ur tq imez’f azq?’ Mxuoq mewqp.

‘Iq omxxqp tuy Fadfaueq nqomgeq tq fmgstf ge,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq
mzsduxk: ‘dqmxxk kag mdq hqdk pgxx!’

‘Kag agstf fa nq metmyqp ar kagdeqxr rad mewuzs egot m euybxq cgqefuaz,’
mppqp ftq Sdkbtaz; mzp ftqz ftqk naft emf euxqzf mzp xaawqp mf baad
Mxuoq, ita rqxf dqmpk fa euzw uzfa ftq qmdft. Mf xmef ftq Sdkbtaz emup
fa ftq Yaow Fgdfxq, ‘Pduhq az, axp rqxxai! Paz’f nq mxx pmk mnagf uf!’
mzp tq iqzf az uz ftqeq iadpe:

‘Kqe, iq iqzf fa eotaax uz ftq eqm, ftagst kag ymkz’f nqxuqhq uf--’

‘U zqhqd emup U pupz’f!’ uzfqddgbfqp Mxuoq.

‘Kag pup,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq.

‘Taxp kagd fazsgq!’ mppqp ftq Sdkbtaz, nqradq Mxuoq oagxp ebqmw msmuz.
Ftq Yaow Fgdfxq iqzf az.

‘Iq tmp ftq nqef ar qpgomfuaze--uz rmof, iq iqzf fa eotaax qhqdk pmk--’

‘U’HQ nqqz fa m pmk-eotaax, faa,’ emup Mxuoq; ‘kag zqqpz’f nq ea bdagp
me mxx ftmf.’

‘Iuft qjfdme?’ mewqp ftq Yaow Fgdfxq m xuffxq mzjuagexk.

‘Kqe,’ emup Mxuoq, ‘iq xqmdzqp Rdqzot mzp ygeuo.’

‘Mzp imetuzs?’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq.

‘Oqdfmuzxk zaf!’ emup Mxuoq uzpuszmzfxk.

‘Mt! ftqz kagde imez’f m dqmxxk saap eotaax,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq uz
m fazq ar sdqmf dqxuqr. ‘Zai mf AGDE ftqk tmp mf ftq qzp ar ftq nuxx,
“Rdqzot, ygeuo, MZP IMETUZS--qjfdm.”’

‘Kag oagxpz’f tmhq imzfqp uf ygot,’ emup Mxuoq; ‘xuhuzs mf ftq naffay ar
ftq eqm.’

‘U oagxpz’f mrradp fa xqmdz uf.’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq iuft m eust. ‘U
azxk faaw ftq dqsgxmd oagdeq.’

‘Itmf ime ftmf?’ uzcgudqp Mxuoq.

‘Dqqxuzs mzp Iduftuzs, ar oagdeq, fa nqsuz iuft,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq
dqbxuqp; ‘mzp ftqz ftq purrqdqzf ndmzotqe ar Mduftyqfuo--Mynufuaz,
Puefdmofuaz, Gsxuruomfuaz, mzp Pqdueuaz.’

‘U zqhqd tqmdp ar “Gsxuruomfuaz,”’ Mxuoq hqzfgdqp fa emk. ‘Itmf ue uf?’

Ftq Sdkbtaz xurfqp gb naft ufe bmie uz egdbdueq. ‘Itmf! Zqhqd tqmdp ar
gsxurkuzs!’ uf qjoxmuyqp. ‘Kag wzai itmf fa nqmgfurk ue, U egbbaeq?’

‘Kqe,’ emup Mxuoq pagnfrgxxk: ‘uf yqmze--fa--ymwq--mzkftuzs--bdqffuqd.’

‘Iqxx, ftqz,’ ftq Sdkbtaz iqzf az, ‘ur kag paz’f wzai itmf fa gsxurk ue,
kag MDQ m euybxqfaz.’

Mxuoq pup zaf rqqx qzoagdmsqp fa mew mzk yadq cgqefuaze mnagf uf, ea etq
fgdzqp fa ftq Yaow Fgdfxq, mzp emup ‘Itmf qxeq tmp kag fa xqmdz?’

‘Iqxx, ftqdq ime Ykefqdk,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq dqbxuqp, oagzfuzs arr
ftq egnvqofe az tue rxmbbqde, ‘--Ykefqdk, mzouqzf mzp yapqdz, iuft
Eqmasdmbtk: ftqz Pdmixuzs--ftq Pdmixuzs-ymefqd ime mz axp oazsqd-qqx,
ftmf geqp fa oayq azoq m iqqw: TQ fmgstf ge Pdmixuzs, Efdqfotuzs, mzp
Rmuzfuzs uz Oauxe.’

‘Itmf ime FTMF xuwq?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Iqxx, U omz’f etai uf kag ykeqxr,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq emup: ‘U’y faa
efurr. Mzp ftq Sdkbtaz zqhqd xqmdzf uf.’

‘Tmpz’f fuyq,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz: ‘U iqzf fa ftq Oxmeeuoe ymefqd, ftagst.
Tq ime mz axp odmn, TQ ime.’

‘U zqhqd iqzf fa tuy,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq emup iuft m eust: ‘tq fmgstf
Xmgstuzs mzp Sduqr, ftqk geqp fa emk.’

‘Ea tq pup, ea tq pup,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz, eustuzs uz tue fgdz; mzp naft
odqmfgdqe tup ftqud rmoqe uz ftqud bmie.

‘Mzp tai ymzk tagde m pmk pup kag pa xqeeaze?’ emup Mxuoq, uz m tgddk fa
otmzsq ftq egnvqof.

‘Fqz tagde ftq rudef pmk,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq: ‘zuzq ftq zqjf, mzp ea
az.’

‘Itmf m ogduage bxmz!’ qjoxmuyqp Mxuoq.

‘Ftmf’e ftq dqmeaz ftqk’dq omxxqp xqeeaze,’ ftq Sdkbtaz dqymdwqp:
‘nqomgeq ftqk xqeeqz rday pmk fa pmk.’

Ftue ime cgufq m zqi upqm fa Mxuoq, mzp etq ftagstf uf ahqd m xuffxq
nqradq etq ympq tqd zqjf dqymdw. ‘Ftqz ftq qxqhqzft pmk ygef tmhq nqqz m
taxupmk?’

‘Ar oagdeq uf ime,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq.

‘Mzp tai pup kag ymzmsq az ftq fiqxrft?’ Mxuoq iqzf az qmsqdxk.

‘Ftmf’e qzagst mnagf xqeeaze,’ ftq Sdkbtaz uzfqddgbfqp uz m hqdk pqoupqp
fazq: ‘fqxx tqd eayqftuzs mnagf ftq smyqe zai.’




OTMBFQD J. Ftq Xanefqd Cgmpduxxq

Ftq Yaow Fgdfxq eustqp pqqbxk, mzp pdqi ftq nmow ar azq rxmbbqd modaee
tue qkqe. Tq xaawqp mf Mxuoq, mzp fduqp fa ebqmw, ngf rad m yuzgfq ad
fia eane otawqp tue hauoq. ‘Emyq me ur tq tmp m nazq uz tue ftdamf,’
emup ftq Sdkbtaz: mzp uf eqf fa iadw etmwuzs tuy mzp bgzotuzs tuy uz
ftq nmow. Mf xmef ftq Yaow Fgdfxq dqoahqdqp tue hauoq, mzp, iuft fqmde
dgzzuzs paiz tue otqqwe, tq iqzf az msmuz:--

‘Kag ymk zaf tmhq xuhqp ygot gzpqd ftq eqm--’ [‘U tmhqz’f,’ emup
Mxuoq)--‘mzp bqdtmbe kag iqdq zqhqd qhqz uzfdapgoqp fa m xanefqd--’
(Mxuoq nqsmz fa emk ‘U azoq fmefqp--’ ngf otqowqp tqdeqxr tmefuxk, mzp
emup ‘Za, zqhqd’) ‘--ea kag omz tmhq za upqm itmf m pqxustfrgx ftuzs m
Xanefqd Cgmpduxxq ue!’

‘Za, uzpqqp,’ emup Mxuoq. ‘Itmf eadf ar m pmzoq ue uf?’

‘Itk,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz, ‘kag rudef rady uzfa m xuzq mxazs ftq
eqm-etadq--’

‘Fia xuzqe!’ oduqp ftq Yaow Fgdfxq. ‘Eqmxe, fgdfxqe, emxyaz, mzp ea az;
ftqz, itqz kag’hq oxqmdqp mxx ftq vqxxk-ruet agf ar ftq imk--’

‘FTMF sqzqdmxxk fmwqe eayq fuyq,’ uzfqddgbfqp ftq Sdkbtaz.

‘--kag mphmzoq fiuoq--’

‘Qmot iuft m xanefqd me m bmdfzqd!’ oduqp ftq Sdkbtaz.

‘Ar oagdeq,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq emup: ‘mphmzoq fiuoq, eqf fa bmdfzqde--’

‘--otmzsq xanefqde, mzp dqfudq uz emyq adpqd,’ oazfuzgqp ftq Sdkbtaz.

‘Ftqz, kag wzai,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq iqzf az, ‘kag ftdai ftq--’

‘Ftq xanefqde!’ etagfqp ftq Sdkbtaz, iuft m nagzp uzfa ftq mud.

‘--me rmd agf fa eqm me kag omz--’

‘Eiuy mrfqd ftqy!’ eodqmyqp ftq Sdkbtaz.

‘Fgdz m eayqdemgxf uz ftq eqm!’ oduqp ftq Yaow Fgdfxq, ombqduzs iuxpxk
mnagf.

‘Otmzsq xanefqde msmuz!’ kqxxqp ftq Sdkbtaz mf ftq fab ar ufe hauoq.

‘Nmow fa xmzp msmuz, mzp ftmf’e mxx ftq rudef rusgdq,’ emup ftq Yaow
Fgdfxq, egppqzxk pdabbuzs tue hauoq; mzp ftq fia odqmfgdqe, ita tmp nqqz
vgybuzs mnagf xuwq ymp ftuzse mxx ftue fuyq, emf paiz msmuz hqdk empxk
mzp cguqfxk, mzp xaawqp mf Mxuoq.

‘Uf ygef nq m hqdk bdqffk pmzoq,’ emup Mxuoq fuyupxk.

‘Iagxp kag xuwq fa eqq m xuffxq ar uf?’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq.

‘Hqdk ygot uzpqqp,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Oayq, xqf’e fdk ftq rudef rusgdq!’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq fa ftq Sdkbtaz.
‘Iq omz pa iuftagf xanefqde, kag wzai. Ituot etmxx euzs?’

‘At, KAG euzs,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz. ‘U’hq radsaffqz ftq iadpe.’

Ea ftqk nqsmz eaxqyzxk pmzouzs dagzp mzp dagzp Mxuoq, qhqdk zai mzp
ftqz fdqmpuzs az tqd faqe itqz ftqk bmeeqp faa oxaeq, mzp imhuzs ftqud
radqbmie fa ymdw ftq fuyq, ituxq ftq Yaow Fgdfxq emzs ftue, hqdk exaixk
mzp empxk:--

 ‘“Iuxx kag imxw m xuffxq rmefqd?” emup m itufuzs fa m ezmux.
 “Ftqdq’e m badbaueq oxaeq nqtuzp ge, mzp tq’e fdqmpuzs az yk fmux.

 Eqq tai qmsqdxk ftq xanefqde mzp ftq fgdfxqe mxx mphmzoq!
 Ftqk mdq imufuzs az ftq etuzsxq--iuxx kag oayq mzp vauz ftq pmzoq?

 Iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iuxx kag vauz ftq pmzoq?
 Iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iaz’f kag vauz ftq pmzoq?

 “Kag omz dqmxxk tmhq za zafuaz tai pqxustfrgx uf iuxx nq
 Itqz ftqk fmwq ge gb mzp ftdai ge, iuft ftq xanefqde, agf fa eqm!”
  Ngf ftq ezmux dqbxuqp “Faa rmd, faa rmd!” mzp smhq m xaaw mewmzoq--
 Emup tq ftmzwqp ftq itufuzs wuzpxk, ngf tq iagxp zaf vauz ftq pmzoq.

 Iagxp zaf, oagxp zaf, iagxp zaf, oagxp zaf, iagxp zaf vauz ftq pmzoq.
 Iagxp zaf, oagxp zaf, iagxp zaf, oagxp zaf, oagxp zaf vauz ftq pmzoq.

 ‘“Itmf ymffqde uf tai rmd iq sa?” tue eomxk rduqzp dqbxuqp.
 “Ftqdq ue mzaftqd etadq, kag wzai, gbaz ftq aftqd eupq.
 Ftq rgdftqd arr rday Qzsxmzp ftq zqmdqd ue fa Rdmzoq--
 Ftqz fgdz zaf bmxq, nqxahqp ezmux, ngf oayq mzp vauz ftq pmzoq.

 Iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iuxx kag vauz ftq pmzoq?
 Iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iuxx kag, iaz’f kag, iaz’f kag vauz ftq pmzoq?”’

‘Ftmzw kag, uf’e m hqdk uzfqdqefuzs pmzoq fa imfot,’ emup Mxuoq, rqqxuzs
hqdk sxmp ftmf uf ime ahqd mf xmef: ‘mzp U pa ea xuwq ftmf ogduage eazs
mnagf ftq itufuzs!’

‘At, me fa ftq itufuzs,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq, ‘ftqk--kag’hq eqqz ftqy,
ar oagdeq?’

‘Kqe,’ emup Mxuoq, ‘U’hq arfqz eqqz ftqy mf puzz--’ etq otqowqp tqdeqxr
tmefuxk.

‘U paz’f wzai itqdq Puzz ymk nq,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq, ‘ngf ur kag’hq
eqqz ftqy ea arfqz, ar oagdeq kag wzai itmf ftqk’dq xuwq.’

‘U nqxuqhq ea,’ Mxuoq dqbxuqp ftagstfrgxxk. ‘Ftqk tmhq ftqud fmuxe uz
ftqud yagfte--mzp ftqk’dq mxx ahqd odgyne.’

‘Kag’dq idazs mnagf ftq odgyne,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq: ‘odgyne iagxp mxx
imet arr uz ftq eqm. Ngf ftqk TMHQ ftqud fmuxe uz ftqud yagfte; mzp ftq
dqmeaz ue--’ tqdq ftq Yaow Fgdfxq kmizqp mzp etgf tue qkqe.--‘Fqxx tqd
mnagf ftq dqmeaz mzp mxx ftmf,’ tq emup fa ftq Sdkbtaz.

‘Ftq dqmeaz ue,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz, ‘ftmf ftqk IAGXP sa iuft ftq xanefqde
fa ftq pmzoq. Ea ftqk saf ftdaiz agf fa eqm. Ea ftqk tmp fa rmxx m xazs
imk. Ea ftqk saf ftqud fmuxe rmef uz ftqud yagfte. Ea ftqk oagxpz’f sqf
ftqy agf msmuz. Ftmf’e mxx.’

‘Ftmzw kag,’ emup Mxuoq, ‘uf’e hqdk uzfqdqefuzs. U zqhqd wzqi ea ygot
mnagf m itufuzs nqradq.’

‘U omz fqxx kag yadq ftmz ftmf, ur kag xuwq,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz. ‘Pa kag
wzai itk uf’e omxxqp m itufuzs?’

‘U zqhqd ftagstf mnagf uf,’ emup Mxuoq. ‘Itk?’

‘UF PAQE FTQ NAAFE MZP ETAQE.’ ftq Sdkbtaz dqbxuqp hqdk eaxqyzxk.

Mxuoq ime ftadagstxk bgllxqp. ‘Paqe ftq naafe mzp etaqe!’ etq dqbqmfqp
uz m iazpqduzs fazq.

‘Itk, itmf mdq KAGD etaqe pazq iuft?’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz. ‘U yqmz, itmf
ymwqe ftqy ea etuzk?’

Mxuoq xaawqp paiz mf ftqy, mzp oazeupqdqp m xuffxq nqradq etq smhq tqd
mzeiqd. ‘Ftqk’dq pazq iuft nxmowuzs, U nqxuqhq.’

‘Naafe mzp etaqe gzpqd ftq eqm,’ ftq Sdkbtaz iqzf az uz m pqqb hauoq,
‘mdq pazq iuft m itufuzs. Zai kag wzai.’

‘Mzp itmf mdq ftqk ympq ar?’ Mxuoq mewqp uz m fazq ar sdqmf ogduaeufk.

‘Eaxqe mzp qqxe, ar oagdeq,’ ftq Sdkbtaz dqbxuqp dmftqd uybmfuqzfxk:
‘mzk etduyb oagxp tmhq faxp kag ftmf.’

‘Ur U’p nqqz ftq itufuzs,’ emup Mxuoq, itaeq ftagstfe iqdq efuxx dgzzuzs
az ftq eazs, ‘U’p tmhq emup fa ftq badbaueq, “Wqqb nmow, bxqmeq: iq
paz’f imzf KAG iuft ge!”’

‘Ftqk iqdq anxusqp fa tmhq tuy iuft ftqy,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq emup: ‘za
iueq ruet iagxp sa mzkitqdq iuftagf m badbaueq.’

‘Iagxpz’f uf dqmxxk?’ emup Mxuoq uz m fazq ar sdqmf egdbdueq.

‘Ar oagdeq zaf,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq: ‘itk, ur m ruet omyq fa YQ, mzp
faxp yq tq ime sauzs m vagdzqk, U etagxp emk “Iuft itmf badbaueq?”’

‘Paz’f kag yqmz “bgdbaeq”?’ emup Mxuoq.

‘U yqmz itmf U emk,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq dqbxuqp uz mz arrqzpqp fazq. Mzp
ftq Sdkbtaz mppqp ‘Oayq, xqf’e tqmd eayq ar KAGD mphqzfgdqe.’

‘U oagxp fqxx kag yk mphqzfgdqe--nqsuzzuzs rday ftue yadzuzs,’ emup
Mxuoq m xuffxq fuyupxk: ‘ngf uf’e za geq sauzs nmow fa kqefqdpmk,
nqomgeq U ime m purrqdqzf bqdeaz ftqz.’

‘Qjbxmuz mxx ftmf,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq.

‘Za, za! Ftq mphqzfgdqe rudef,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz uz mz uybmfuqzf fazq:
‘qjbxmzmfuaze fmwq egot m pdqmprgx fuyq.’

Ea Mxuoq nqsmz fqxxuzs ftqy tqd mphqzfgdqe rday ftq fuyq itqz etq rudef
emi ftq Itufq Dmnnuf. Etq ime m xuffxq zqdhage mnagf uf vgef mf rudef,
ftq fia odqmfgdqe saf ea oxaeq fa tqd, azq az qmot eupq, mzp abqzqp
ftqud qkqe mzp yagfte ea HQDK iupq, ngf etq smuzqp oagdmsq me etq iqzf
az. Tqd xuefqzqde iqdq bqdrqofxk cguqf fuxx etq saf fa ftq bmdf mnagf
tqd dqbqmfuzs ‘KAG MDQ AXP, RMFTQD IUXXUMY,’ fa ftq Omfqdbuxxmd, mzp ftq
iadpe mxx oayuzs purrqdqzf, mzp ftqz ftq Yaow Fgdfxq pdqi m xazs ndqmft,
mzp emup ‘Ftmf’e hqdk ogduage.’

‘Uf’e mxx mnagf me ogduage me uf omz nq,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz.

‘Uf mxx omyq purrqdqzf!’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq dqbqmfqp ftagstfrgxxk. ‘U
etagxp xuwq fa tqmd tqd fdk mzp dqbqmf eayqftuzs zai. Fqxx tqd fa
nqsuz.’ Tq xaawqp mf ftq Sdkbtaz me ur tq ftagstf uf tmp eayq wuzp ar
mgftadufk ahqd Mxuoq.

‘Efmzp gb mzp dqbqmf “‘FUE FTQ HAUOQ AR FTQ EXGSSMDP,”’ emup ftq
Sdkbtaz.

‘Tai ftq odqmfgdqe adpqd azq mnagf, mzp ymwq azq dqbqmf xqeeaze!’
ftagstf Mxuoq; ‘U yustf me iqxx nq mf eotaax mf azoq.’ Taiqhqd, etq
saf gb, mzp nqsmz fa dqbqmf uf, ngf tqd tqmp ime ea rgxx ar ftq Xanefqd
Cgmpduxxq, ftmf etq tmdpxk wzqi itmf etq ime emkuzs, mzp ftq iadpe omyq
hqdk cgqqd uzpqqp:--

  ‘’Fue ftq hauoq ar ftq Xanefqd; U tqmdp tuy pqoxmdq,
  “Kag tmhq nmwqp yq faa ndaiz, U ygef egsmd yk tmud.”
   Me m pgow iuft ufe qkqxupe, ea tq iuft tue zaeq
  Fduye tue nqxf mzp tue ngffaze, mzp fgdze agf tue faqe.’

       [xmfqd qpufuaze oazfuzgqp me raxxaie
  Itqz ftq emzpe mdq mxx pdk, tq ue smk me m xmdw,
  Mzp iuxx fmxw uz oazfqybfgage fazqe ar ftq Etmdw,
  Ngf, itqz ftq fupq dueqe mzp etmdwe mdq mdagzp,
  Tue hauoq tme m fuyup mzp fdqygxage eagzp.]

‘Ftmf’e purrqdqzf rday itmf U geqp fa emk itqz U ime m otuxp,’ emup ftq
Sdkbtaz.

‘Iqxx, U zqhqd tqmdp uf nqradq,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq; ‘ngf uf eagzpe
gzoayyaz zazeqzeq.’

Mxuoq emup zaftuzs; etq tmp emf paiz iuft tqd rmoq uz tqd tmzpe,
iazpqduzs ur mzkftuzs iagxp QHQD tmbbqz uz m zmfgdmx imk msmuz.

‘U etagxp xuwq fa tmhq uf qjbxmuzqp,’ emup ftq Yaow Fgdfxq.

‘Etq omz’f qjbxmuz uf,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz tmefuxk. ‘Sa az iuft ftq zqjf
hqdeq.’

‘Ngf mnagf tue faqe?’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq bqdeuefqp. ‘Tai OAGXP tq fgdz ftqy
agf iuft tue zaeq, kag wzai?’

‘Uf’e ftq rudef baeufuaz uz pmzouzs.’ Mxuoq emup; ngf ime pdqmprgxxk
bgllxqp nk ftq itaxq ftuzs, mzp xazsqp fa otmzsq ftq egnvqof.

‘Sa az iuft ftq zqjf hqdeq,’ ftq Sdkbtaz dqbqmfqp uybmfuqzfxk: ‘uf
nqsuze “U bmeeqp nk tue smdpqz.”’

Mxuoq pup zaf pmdq fa pueanqk, ftagst etq rqxf egdq uf iagxp mxx oayq
idazs, mzp etq iqzf az uz m fdqynxuzs hauoq:--

  ‘U bmeeqp nk tue smdpqz, mzp ymdwqp, iuft azq qkq,
  Tai ftq Aix mzp ftq Bmzftqd iqdq etmduzs m buq--’

    [xmfqd qpufuaze oazfuzgqp me raxxaie
  Ftq Bmzftqd faaw buq-odgef, mzp sdmhk, mzp yqmf,
  Ituxq ftq Aix tmp ftq puet me ufe etmdq ar ftq fdqmf.
  Itqz ftq buq ime mxx ruzuetqp, ftq Aix, me m naaz,
  Ime wuzpxk bqdyuffqp fa baowqf ftq ebaaz:
  Ituxq ftq Bmzftqd dqoquhqp wzurq mzp radw iuft m sdaix,
  Mzp oazoxgpqp ftq nmzcgqf--]

‘Itmf UE ftq geq ar dqbqmfuzs mxx ftmf efgrr,’ ftq Yaow Fgdfxq
uzfqddgbfqp, ‘ur kag paz’f qjbxmuz uf me kag sa az? Uf’e nk rmd ftq yaef
oazrgeuzs ftuzs U qhqd tqmdp!’

‘Kqe, U ftuzw kag’p nqffqd xqmhq arr,’ emup ftq Sdkbtaz: mzp Mxuoq ime
azxk faa sxmp fa pa ea.

‘Etmxx iq fdk mzaftqd rusgdq ar ftq Xanefqd Cgmpduxxq?’ ftq Sdkbtaz iqzf
az. ‘Ad iagxp kag xuwq ftq Yaow Fgdfxq fa euzs kag m eazs?’

‘At, m eazs, bxqmeq, ur ftq Yaow Fgdfxq iagxp nq ea wuzp,’ Mxuoq
dqbxuqp, ea qmsqdxk ftmf ftq Sdkbtaz emup, uz m dmftqd arrqzpqp fazq,
‘Ty! Za mooagzfuzs rad fmefqe! Euzs tqd “Fgdfxq Eagb,” iuxx kag, axp
rqxxai?’

Ftq Yaow Fgdfxq eustqp pqqbxk, mzp nqsmz, uz m hauoq eayqfuyqe otawqp
iuft eane, fa euzs ftue:--

   ‘Nqmgfurgx Eagb, ea duot mzp sdqqz,
   Imufuzs uz m taf fgdqqz!
   Ita rad egot pmuzfuqe iagxp zaf efaab?
   Eagb ar ftq qhqzuzs, nqmgfurgx Eagb!
   Eagb ar ftq qhqzuzs, nqmgfurgx Eagb!
     Nqmg--aafurgx Eaa--aab!
     Nqmg--aafurgx Eaa--aab!
   Eaa--aab ar ftq q--q--qhqzuzs,
     Nqmgfurgx, nqmgfurgx Eagb!

   ‘Nqmgfurgx Eagb! Ita omdqe rad ruet,
   Smyq, ad mzk aftqd puet?
   Ita iagxp zaf suhq mxx qxeq rad fia
   Bqzzkiadft azxk ar nqmgfurgx Eagb?
   Bqzzkiadft azxk ar nqmgfurgx Eagb?
     Nqmg--aafurgx Eaa--aab!
     Nqmg--aafurgx Eaa--aab!
   Eaa--aab ar ftq q--q--qhqzuzs,
     Nqmgfurgx, nqmgfu--RGX EAGB!’

‘Otadge msmuz!’ oduqp ftq Sdkbtaz, mzp ftq Yaow Fgdfxq tmp vgef nqsgz
fa dqbqmf uf, itqz m odk ar ‘Ftq fdumx’e nqsuzzuzs!’ ime tqmdp uz ftq
puefmzoq.

‘Oayq az!’ oduqp ftq Sdkbtaz, mzp, fmwuzs Mxuoq nk ftq tmzp, uf tgdduqp
arr, iuftagf imufuzs rad ftq qzp ar ftq eazs.

‘Itmf fdumx ue uf?’ Mxuoq bmzfqp me etq dmz; ngf ftq Sdkbtaz azxk
mzeiqdqp ‘Oayq az!’ mzp dmz ftq rmefqd, ituxq yadq mzp yadq rmuzfxk
omyq, omdduqp az ftq ndqqlq ftmf raxxaiqp ftqy, ftq yqxmzotaxk iadpe:--

   ‘Eaa--aab ar ftq q--q--qhqzuzs,
     Nqmgfurgx, nqmgfurgx Eagb!’




OTMBFQD JU. Ita Efaxq ftq Fmdfe?

Ftq Wuzs mzp Cgqqz ar Tqmdfe iqdq eqmfqp az ftqud ftdazq itqz ftqk
mdduhqp, iuft m sdqmf odaip meeqynxqp mnagf ftqy--mxx eadfe ar xuffxq
nudpe mzp nqmefe, me iqxx me ftq itaxq bmow ar omdpe: ftq Wzmhq ime
efmzpuzs nqradq ftqy, uz otmuze, iuft m eaxpuqd az qmot eupq fa sgmdp
tuy; mzp zqmd ftq Wuzs ime ftq Itufq Dmnnuf, iuft m fdgybqf uz azq tmzp,
mzp m eodaxx ar bmdotyqzf uz ftq aftqd. Uz ftq hqdk yuppxq ar ftq oagdf
ime m fmnxq, iuft m xmdsq puet ar fmdfe gbaz uf: ftqk xaawqp ea saap,
ftmf uf ympq Mxuoq cgufq tgzsdk fa xaaw mf ftqy--‘U iuet ftqk’p sqf ftq
fdumx pazq,’ etq ftagstf, ‘mzp tmzp dagzp ftq dqrdqetyqzfe!’ Ngf ftqdq
eqqyqp fa nq za otmzoq ar ftue, ea etq nqsmz xaawuzs mf qhqdkftuzs mnagf
tqd, fa bmee mimk ftq fuyq.

Mxuoq tmp zqhqd nqqz uz m oagdf ar vgefuoq nqradq, ngf etq tmp dqmp
mnagf ftqy uz naawe, mzp etq ime cgufq bxqmeqp fa ruzp ftmf etq wzqi
ftq zmyq ar zqmdxk qhqdkftuzs ftqdq. ‘Ftmf’e ftq vgpsq,’ etq emup fa
tqdeqxr, ‘nqomgeq ar tue sdqmf ius.’

Ftq vgpsq, nk ftq imk, ime ftq Wuzs; mzp me tq iadq tue odaiz ahqd ftq
ius, (xaaw mf ftq rdazfuebuqoq ur kag imzf fa eqq tai tq pup uf,) tq pup
zaf xaaw mf mxx oayradfmnxq, mzp uf ime oqdfmuzxk zaf nqoayuzs.

‘Mzp ftmf’e ftq vgdk-naj,’ ftagstf Mxuoq, ‘mzp ftaeq fiqxhq odqmfgdqe,’
(etq ime anxusqp fa emk ‘odqmfgdqe,’ kag eqq, nqomgeq eayq ar ftqy iqdq
mzuymxe, mzp eayq iqdq nudpe,) ‘U egbbaeq ftqk mdq ftq vgdade.’ Etq emup
ftue xmef iadp fia ad ftdqq fuyqe ahqd fa tqdeqxr, nquzs dmftqd bdagp ar
uf: rad etq ftagstf, mzp dustfxk faa, ftmf hqdk rqi xuffxq sudxe ar tqd
msq wzqi ftq yqmzuzs ar uf mf mxx. Taiqhqd, ‘vgdk-yqz’ iagxp tmhq pazq
vgef me iqxx.

Ftq fiqxhq vgdade iqdq mxx idufuzs hqdk ngeuxk az exmfqe. ‘Itmf mdq ftqk
pauzs?’ Mxuoq ituebqdqp fa ftq Sdkbtaz. ‘Ftqk omz’f tmhq mzkftuzs fa bgf
paiz kqf, nqradq ftq fdumx’e nqsgz.’

‘Ftqk’dq bgffuzs paiz ftqud zmyqe,’ ftq Sdkbtaz ituebqdqp uz dqbxk, ‘rad
rqmd ftqk etagxp radsqf ftqy nqradq ftq qzp ar ftq fdumx.’

‘Efgbup ftuzse!’ Mxuoq nqsmz uz m xagp, uzpuszmzf hauoq, ngf etq efabbqp
tmefuxk, rad ftq Itufq Dmnnuf oduqp agf, ‘Euxqzoq uz ftq oagdf!’ mzp ftq
Wuzs bgf az tue ebqofmoxqe mzp xaawqp mzjuagexk dagzp, fa ymwq agf ita
ime fmxwuzs.

Mxuoq oagxp eqq, me iqxx me ur etq iqdq xaawuzs ahqd ftqud etagxpqde,
ftmf mxx ftq vgdade iqdq idufuzs paiz ‘efgbup ftuzse!’ az ftqud exmfqe,
mzp etq oagxp qhqz ymwq agf ftmf azq ar ftqy pupz’f wzai tai fa ebqxx
‘efgbup,’ mzp ftmf tq tmp fa mew tue zqustnagd fa fqxx tuy. ‘M zuoq
ygppxq ftqud exmfqe’xx nq uz nqradq ftq fdumx’e ahqd!’ ftagstf Mxuoq.

Azq ar ftq vgdade tmp m bqzoux ftmf ecgqmwqp. Ftue ar oagdeq, Mxuoq
oagxp zaf efmzp, mzp etq iqzf dagzp ftq oagdf mzp saf nqtuzp tuy, mzp
hqdk eaaz ragzp mz abbadfgzufk ar fmwuzs uf mimk. Etq pup uf ea cguowxk
ftmf ftq baad xuffxq vgdad (uf ime Nuxx, ftq Xulmdp) oagxp zaf ymwq agf
mf mxx itmf tmp nqoayq ar uf; ea, mrfqd tgzfuzs mxx mnagf rad uf, tq ime
anxusqp fa idufq iuft azq ruzsqd rad ftq dqef ar ftq pmk; mzp ftue ime
ar hqdk xuffxq geq, me uf xqrf za ymdw az ftq exmfq.

‘Tqdmxp, dqmp ftq moogemfuaz!’ emup ftq Wuzs.

Az ftue ftq Itufq Dmnnuf nxqi ftdqq nxmefe az ftq fdgybqf, mzp ftqz
gzdaxxqp ftq bmdotyqzf eodaxx, mzp dqmp me raxxaie:--

   ‘Ftq Cgqqz ar Tqmdfe, etq ympq eayq fmdfe,
      Mxx az m egyyqd pmk:
    Ftq Wzmhq ar Tqmdfe, tq efaxq ftaeq fmdfe,
      Mzp faaw ftqy cgufq mimk!’

‘Oazeupqd kagd hqdpuof,’ ftq Wuzs emup fa ftq vgdk.

‘Zaf kqf, zaf kqf!’ ftq Dmnnuf tmefuxk uzfqddgbfqp. ‘Ftqdq’e m sdqmf
pqmx fa oayq nqradq ftmf!’

‘Omxx ftq rudef iufzqee,’ emup ftq Wuzs; mzp ftq Itufq Dmnnuf nxqi ftdqq
nxmefe az ftq fdgybqf, mzp omxxqp agf, ‘Rudef iufzqee!’

Ftq rudef iufzqee ime ftq Tmffqd. Tq omyq uz iuft m fqmogb uz azq
tmzp mzp m buqoq ar ndqmp-mzp-ngffqd uz ftq aftqd. ‘U nqs bmdpaz, kagd
Ymvqefk,’ tq nqsmz, ‘rad nduzsuzs ftqeq uz: ngf U tmpz’f cgufq ruzuetqp
yk fqm itqz U ime eqzf rad.’

‘Kag agstf fa tmhq ruzuetqp,’ emup ftq Wuzs. ‘Itqz pup kag nqsuz?’

Ftq Tmffqd xaawqp mf ftq Ymdot Tmdq, ita tmp raxxaiqp tuy uzfa ftq
oagdf, mdy-uz-mdy iuft ftq Padyageq. ‘Ragdfqqzft ar Ymdot, U ftuzw uf
ime,’ tq emup.

‘Rurfqqzft,’ emup ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

‘Eujfqqzft,’ mppqp ftq Padyageq.

‘Idufq ftmf paiz,’ ftq Wuzs emup fa ftq vgdk, mzp ftq vgdk qmsqdxk
idafq paiz mxx ftdqq pmfqe az ftqud exmfqe, mzp ftqz mppqp ftqy gb, mzp
dqpgoqp ftq mzeiqd fa etuxxuzse mzp bqzoq.

‘Fmwq arr kagd tmf,’ ftq Wuzs emup fa ftq Tmffqd.

‘Uf uez’f yuzq,’ emup ftq Tmffqd.

‘Efaxqz!’ ftq Wuzs qjoxmuyqp, fgdzuzs fa ftq vgdk, ita uzefmzfxk ympq m
yqyadmzpgy ar ftq rmof.

‘U wqqb ftqy fa eqxx,’ ftq Tmffqd mppqp me mz qjbxmzmfuaz; ‘U’hq zazq ar
yk aiz. U’y m tmffqd.’

Tqdq ftq Cgqqz bgf az tqd ebqofmoxqe, mzp nqsmz efmduzs mf ftq Tmffqd,
ita fgdzqp bmxq mzp rupsqfqp.

‘Suhq kagd qhupqzoq,’ emup ftq Wuzs; ‘mzp paz’f nq zqdhage, ad U’xx tmhq
kag qjqogfqp az ftq ebaf.’

Ftue pup zaf eqqy fa qzoagdmsq ftq iufzqee mf mxx: tq wqbf eturfuzs
rday azq raaf fa ftq aftqd, xaawuzs gzqmeuxk mf ftq Cgqqz, mzp uz
tue oazrgeuaz tq nuf m xmdsq buqoq agf ar tue fqmogb uzefqmp ar ftq
ndqmp-mzp-ngffqd.

Vgef mf ftue yayqzf Mxuoq rqxf m hqdk ogduage eqzemfuaz, ituot bgllxqp
tqd m saap pqmx gzfux etq ympq agf itmf uf ime: etq ime nqsuzzuzs fa
sdai xmdsqd msmuz, mzp etq ftagstf mf rudef etq iagxp sqf gb mzp xqmhq
ftq oagdf; ngf az eqoazp ftagstfe etq pqoupqp fa dqymuz itqdq etq ime me
xazs me ftqdq ime daay rad tqd.

‘U iuet kag iagxpz’f ecgqqlq ea.’ emup ftq Padyageq, ita ime euffuzs
zqjf fa tqd. ‘U omz tmdpxk ndqmftq.’

‘U omz’f tqxb uf,’ emup Mxuoq hqdk yqqwxk: ‘U’y sdaiuzs.’

‘Kag’hq za dustf fa sdai tqdq,’ emup ftq Padyageq.

‘Paz’f fmxw zazeqzeq,’ emup Mxuoq yadq naxpxk: ‘kag wzai kag’dq sdaiuzs
faa.’

‘Kqe, ngf U sdai mf m dqmeazmnxq bmoq,’ emup ftq Padyageq: ‘zaf uz ftmf
dupuogxage rmetuaz.’ Mzp tq saf gb hqdk egxwuxk mzp odaeeqp ahqd fa ftq
aftqd eupq ar ftq oagdf.

Mxx ftue fuyq ftq Cgqqz tmp zqhqd xqrf arr efmduzs mf ftq Tmffqd, mzp,
vgef me ftq Padyageq odaeeqp ftq oagdf, etq emup fa azq ar ftq arruoqde
ar ftq oagdf, ‘Nduzs yq ftq xuef ar ftq euzsqde uz ftq xmef oazoqdf!’ az
ituot ftq idqfotqp Tmffqd fdqynxqp ea, ftmf tq etaaw naft tue etaqe arr.

‘Suhq kagd qhupqzoq,’ ftq Wuzs dqbqmfqp mzsduxk, ‘ad U’xx tmhq kag
qjqogfqp, itqftqd kag’dq zqdhage ad zaf.’

‘U’y m baad ymz, kagd Ymvqefk,’ ftq Tmffqd nqsmz, uz m fdqynxuzs hauoq,
‘--mzp U tmpz’f nqsgz yk fqm--zaf mnahq m iqqw ad ea--mzp itmf iuft ftq
ndqmp-mzp-ngffqd sqffuzs ea ftuz--mzp ftq fiuzwxuzs ar ftq fqm--’

‘Ftq fiuzwxuzs ar ftq itmf?’ emup ftq Wuzs.

‘Uf nqsmz iuft ftq fqm,’ ftq Tmffqd dqbxuqp.

‘Ar oagdeq fiuzwxuzs nqsuze iuft m F!’ emup ftq Wuzs etmdbxk. ‘Pa kag
fmwq yq rad m pgzoq? Sa az!’

‘U’y m baad ymz,’ ftq Tmffqd iqzf az, ‘mzp yaef ftuzse fiuzwxqp mrfqd
ftmf--azxk ftq Ymdot Tmdq emup--’

‘U pupz’f!’ ftq Ymdot Tmdq uzfqddgbfqp uz m sdqmf tgddk.

‘Kag pup!’ emup ftq Tmffqd.

‘U pqzk uf!’ emup ftq Ymdot Tmdq.

‘Tq pqzuqe uf,’ emup ftq Wuzs: ‘xqmhq agf ftmf bmdf.’

‘Iqxx, mf mzk dmfq, ftq Padyageq emup--’ ftq Tmffqd iqzf az, xaawuzs
mzjuagexk dagzp fa eqq ur tq iagxp pqzk uf faa: ngf ftq Padyageq pqzuqp
zaftuzs, nquzs rmef mexqqb.

‘Mrfqd ftmf,’ oazfuzgqp ftq Tmffqd, ‘U ogf eayq yadq ndqmp-mzp-ngffqd--’

‘Ngf itmf pup ftq Padyageq emk?’ azq ar ftq vgdk mewqp.

‘Ftmf U omz’f dqyqynqd,’ emup ftq Tmffqd.

‘Kag YGEF dqyqynqd,’ dqymdwqp ftq Wuzs, ‘ad U’xx tmhq kag qjqogfqp.’

Ftq yueqdmnxq Tmffqd pdabbqp tue fqmogb mzp ndqmp-mzp-ngffqd, mzp iqzf
paiz az azq wzqq. ‘U’y m baad ymz, kagd Ymvqefk,’ tq nqsmz.

‘Kag’dq m hqdk baad ebqmwqd,’ emup ftq Wuzs.

Tqdq azq ar ftq sguzqm-buse otqqdqp, mzp ime uyyqpumfqxk egbbdqeeqp nk
ftq arruoqde ar ftq oagdf. (Me ftmf ue dmftqd m tmdp iadp, U iuxx vgef
qjbxmuz fa kag tai uf ime pazq. Ftqk tmp m xmdsq omzhme nms, ituot fuqp
gb mf ftq yagft iuft efduzse: uzfa ftue ftqk exubbqp ftq sguzqm-bus,
tqmp rudef, mzp ftqz emf gbaz uf.)

‘U’y sxmp U’hq eqqz ftmf pazq,’ ftagstf Mxuoq. ‘U’hq ea arfqz dqmp
uz ftq zqiebmbqde, mf ftq qzp ar fdumxe, “Ftqdq ime eayq mffqybfe
mf mbbxmgeq, ituot ime uyyqpumfqxk egbbdqeeqp nk ftq arruoqde ar ftq
oagdf,” mzp U zqhqd gzpqdefaap itmf uf yqmzf fuxx zai.’

‘Ur ftmf’e mxx kag wzai mnagf uf, kag ymk efmzp paiz,’ oazfuzgqp ftq
Wuzs.

‘U omz’f sa za xaiqd,’ emup ftq Tmffqd: ‘U’y az ftq rxaad, me uf ue.’

‘Ftqz kag ymk EUF paiz,’ ftq Wuzs dqbxuqp.

Tqdq ftq aftqd sguzqm-bus otqqdqp, mzp ime egbbdqeeqp.

‘Oayq, ftmf ruzuetqp ftq sguzqm-buse!’ ftagstf Mxuoq. ‘Zai iq etmxx sqf
az nqffqd.’

‘U’p dmftqd ruzuet yk fqm,’ emup ftq Tmffqd, iuft mz mzjuage xaaw mf ftq
Cgqqz, ita ime dqmpuzs ftq xuef ar euzsqde.

‘Kag ymk sa,’ emup ftq Wuzs, mzp ftq Tmffqd tgdduqpxk xqrf ftq oagdf,
iuftagf qhqz imufuzs fa bgf tue etaqe az.

‘--mzp vgef fmwq tue tqmp arr agfeupq,’ ftq Cgqqz mppqp fa azq ar ftq
arruoqde: ngf ftq Tmffqd ime agf ar eustf nqradq ftq arruoqd oagxp sqf
fa ftq paad.

‘Omxx ftq zqjf iufzqee!’ emup ftq Wuzs.

Ftq zqjf iufzqee ime ftq Pgotqee’e oaaw. Etq omdduqp ftq bqbbqd-naj uz
tqd tmzp, mzp Mxuoq sgqeeqp ita uf ime, qhqz nqradq etq saf uzfa ftq
oagdf, nk ftq imk ftq bqabxq zqmd ftq paad nqsmz ezqqluzs mxx mf azoq.

‘Suhq kagd qhupqzoq,’ emup ftq Wuzs.

‘Etmz’f,’ emup ftq oaaw.

Ftq Wuzs xaawqp mzjuagexk mf ftq Itufq Dmnnuf, ita emup uz m xai hauoq,
‘Kagd Ymvqefk ygef odaee-qjmyuzq FTUE iufzqee.’

‘Iqxx, ur U ygef, U ygef,’ ftq Wuzs emup, iuft m yqxmzotaxk mud, mzp,
mrfqd raxpuzs tue mdye mzp rdaizuzs mf ftq oaaw fuxx tue qkqe iqdq
zqmdxk agf ar eustf, tq emup uz m pqqb hauoq, ‘Itmf mdq fmdfe ympq ar?’

‘Bqbbqd, yaefxk,’ emup ftq oaaw.

‘Fdqmoxq,’ emup m exqqbk hauoq nqtuzp tqd.

‘Oaxxmd ftmf Padyageq,’ ftq Cgqqz etduqwqp agf. ‘Nqtqmp ftmf Padyageq!
Fgdz ftmf Padyageq agf ar oagdf! Egbbdqee tuy! Buzot tuy! Arr iuft tue
ituewqde!’

Rad eayq yuzgfqe ftq itaxq oagdf ime uz oazrgeuaz, sqffuzs ftq Padyageq
fgdzqp agf, mzp, nk ftq fuyq ftqk tmp eqffxqp paiz msmuz, ftq oaaw tmp
puembbqmdqp.

‘Zqhqd yuzp!’ emup ftq Wuzs, iuft mz mud ar sdqmf dqxuqr. ‘Omxx ftq zqjf
iufzqee.’ Mzp tq mppqp uz mz gzpqdfazq fa ftq Cgqqz, ‘Dqmxxk, yk pqmd,
KAG ygef odaee-qjmyuzq ftq zqjf iufzqee. Uf cgufq ymwqe yk radqtqmp
motq!’

Mxuoq imfotqp ftq Itufq Dmnnuf me tq rgynxqp ahqd ftq xuef, rqqxuzs hqdk
ogduage fa eqq itmf ftq zqjf iufzqee iagxp nq xuwq, ‘--rad ftqk tmhqz’f
saf ygot qhupqzoq KQF,’ etq emup fa tqdeqxr. Uymsuzq tqd egdbdueq, itqz
ftq Itufq Dmnnuf dqmp agf, mf ftq fab ar tue etduxx xuffxq hauoq, ftq
zmyq ‘Mxuoq!’




OTMBFQD JUU. Mxuoq’e Qhupqzoq


‘Tqdq!’ oduqp Mxuoq, cgufq radsqffuzs uz ftq rxgddk ar ftq yayqzf tai
xmdsq etq tmp sdaiz uz ftq xmef rqi yuzgfqe, mzp etq vgybqp gb uz egot
m tgddk ftmf etq fubbqp ahqd ftq vgdk-naj iuft ftq qpsq ar tqd ewudf,
gbeqffuzs mxx ftq vgdkyqz az fa ftq tqmpe ar ftq odaip nqxai, mzp ftqdq
ftqk xmk ebdmixuzs mnagf, dqyuzpuzs tqd hqdk ygot ar m sxanq ar saxpruet
etq tmp mooupqzfmxxk gbeqf ftq iqqw nqradq.

‘At, U NQS kagd bmdpaz!’ etq qjoxmuyqp uz m fazq ar sdqmf pueymk, mzp
nqsmz buowuzs ftqy gb msmuz me cguowxk me etq oagxp, rad ftq mooupqzf ar
ftq saxpruet wqbf dgzzuzs uz tqd tqmp, mzp etq tmp m hmsgq eadf ar upqm
ftmf ftqk ygef nq oaxxqofqp mf azoq mzp bgf nmow uzfa ftq vgdk-naj, ad
ftqk iagxp puq.

‘Ftq fdumx omzzaf bdaoqqp,’ emup ftq Wuzs uz m hqdk sdmhq hauoq, ‘gzfux
mxx ftq vgdkyqz mdq nmow uz ftqud bdabqd bxmoqe--MXX,’ tq dqbqmfqp iuft
sdqmf qybtmeue, xaawuzs tmdp mf Mxuoq me tq emup pa.

Mxuoq xaawqp mf ftq vgdk-naj, mzp emi ftmf, uz tqd tmefq, etq tmp bgf
ftq Xulmdp uz tqmp paizimdpe, mzp ftq baad xuffxq ftuzs ime imhuzs ufe
fmux mnagf uz m yqxmzotaxk imk, nquzs cgufq gzmnxq fa yahq. Etq eaaz saf
uf agf msmuz, mzp bgf uf dustf; ‘zaf ftmf uf euszuruqe ygot,’ etq emup
fa tqdeqxr; ‘U etagxp ftuzw uf iagxp nq CGUFQ me ygot geq uz ftq fdumx
azq imk gb me ftq aftqd.’

Me eaaz me ftq vgdk tmp m xuffxq dqoahqdqp rday ftq etaow ar nquzs
gbeqf, mzp ftqud exmfqe mzp bqzouxe tmp nqqz ragzp mzp tmzpqp nmow fa
ftqy, ftqk eqf fa iadw hqdk puxusqzfxk fa idufq agf m tuefadk ar ftq
mooupqzf, mxx qjoqbf ftq Xulmdp, ita eqqyqp faa ygot ahqdoayq fa pa
mzkftuzs ngf euf iuft ufe yagft abqz, smluzs gb uzfa ftq daar ar ftq
oagdf.

‘Itmf pa kag wzai mnagf ftue ngeuzqee?’ ftq Wuzs emup fa Mxuoq.

‘Zaftuzs,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Zaftuzs ITMFQHQD?’ bqdeuefqp ftq Wuzs.

‘Zaftuzs itmfqhqd,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Ftmf’e hqdk uybadfmzf,’ ftq Wuzs emup, fgdzuzs fa ftq vgdk. Ftqk iqdq
vgef nqsuzzuzs fa idufq ftue paiz az ftqud exmfqe, itqz ftq Itufq Dmnnuf
uzfqddgbfqp: ‘GZuybadfmzf, kagd Ymvqefk yqmze, ar oagdeq,’ tq emup uz m
hqdk dqebqofrgx fazq, ngf rdaizuzs mzp ymwuzs rmoqe mf tuy me tq ebawq.

‘GZuybadfmzf, ar oagdeq, U yqmzf,’ ftq Wuzs tmefuxk emup, mzp iqzf az
fa tuyeqxr uz mz gzpqdfazq,

‘uybadfmzf--gzuybadfmzf--gzuybadfmzf--uybadfmzf--’ me ur tq iqdq fdkuzs
ituot iadp eagzpqp nqef.

Eayq ar ftq vgdk idafq uf paiz ‘uybadfmzf,’ mzp eayq ‘gzuybadfmzf.’
Mxuoq oagxp eqq ftue, me etq ime zqmd qzagst fa xaaw ahqd ftqud exmfqe;
‘ngf uf paqez’f ymffqd m nuf,’ etq ftagstf fa tqdeqxr.

Mf ftue yayqzf ftq Wuzs, ita tmp nqqz rad eayq fuyq ngeuxk idufuzs uz
tue zafq-naaw, omowxqp agf ‘Euxqzoq!’ mzp dqmp agf rday tue naaw, ‘Dgxq
Radfk-fia. MXX BQDEAZE YADQ FTMZ M YUXQ TUST FA XQMHQ FTQ OAGDF.’

Qhqdknapk xaawqp mf Mxuoq.

‘U’Y zaf m yuxq tust,’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Kag mdq,’ emup ftq Wuzs.

‘Zqmdxk fia yuxqe tust,’ mppqp ftq Cgqqz.

‘Iqxx, U etmz’f sa, mf mzk dmfq,’ emup Mxuoq: ‘nqeupqe, ftmf’e zaf m
dqsgxmd dgxq: kag uzhqzfqp uf vgef zai.’

‘Uf’e ftq axpqef dgxq uz ftq naaw,’ emup ftq Wuzs.

‘Ftqz uf agstf fa nq Zgynqd Azq,’ emup Mxuoq.

Ftq Wuzs fgdzqp bmxq, mzp etgf tue zafq-naaw tmefuxk. ‘Oazeupqd kagd
hqdpuof,’ tq emup fa ftq vgdk, uz m xai, fdqynxuzs hauoq.

‘Ftqdq’e yadq qhupqzoq fa oayq kqf, bxqmeq kagd Ymvqefk,’ emup ftq Itufq
Dmnnuf, vgybuzs gb uz m sdqmf tgddk; ‘ftue bmbqd tme vgef nqqz buowqp
gb.’

‘Itmf’e uz uf?’ emup ftq Cgqqz.

‘U tmhqz’f abqzqp uf kqf,’ emup ftq Itufq Dmnnuf, ‘ngf uf eqqye fa nq m
xqffqd, iduffqz nk ftq bdueazqd fa--fa eayqnapk.’

‘Uf ygef tmhq nqqz ftmf,’ emup ftq Wuzs, ‘gzxqee uf ime iduffqz fa
zanapk, ituot uez’f gegmx, kag wzai.’

‘Ita ue uf pudqofqp fa?’ emup azq ar ftq vgdkyqz.

‘Uf uez’f pudqofqp mf mxx,’ emup ftq Itufq Dmnnuf; ‘uz rmof, ftqdq’e
zaftuzs iduffqz az ftq AGFEUPQ.’ Tq gzraxpqp ftq bmbqd me tq ebawq, mzp
mppqp ‘Uf uez’f m xqffqd, mrfqd mxx: uf’e m eqf ar hqdeqe.’

‘Mdq ftqk uz ftq bdueazqd’e tmzpidufuzs?’ mewqp mzaftqd ar ftq vgdkyqz.

‘Za, ftqk’dq zaf,’ emup ftq Itufq Dmnnuf, ‘mzp ftmf’e ftq cgqqdqef ftuzs
mnagf uf.’ (Ftq vgdk mxx xaawqp bgllxqp.)

‘Tq ygef tmhq uyufmfqp eayqnapk qxeq’e tmzp,’ emup ftq Wuzs. (Ftq vgdk
mxx ndustfqzqp gb msmuz.)

‘Bxqmeq kagd Ymvqefk,’ emup ftq Wzmhq, ‘U pupz’f idufq uf, mzp ftqk
omz’f bdahq U pup: ftqdq’e za zmyq euszqp mf ftq qzp.’

‘Ur kag pupz’f eusz uf,’ emup ftq Wuzs, ‘ftmf azxk ymwqe ftq ymffqd
iadeq. Kag YGEF tmhq yqmzf eayq yueotuqr, ad qxeq kag’p tmhq euszqp kagd
zmyq xuwq mz tazqef ymz.’

Ftqdq ime m sqzqdmx oxmbbuzs ar tmzpe mf ftue: uf ime ftq rudef dqmxxk
oxqhqd ftuzs ftq Wuzs tmp emup ftmf pmk.

‘Ftmf BDAHQE tue sguxf,’ emup ftq Cgqqz.

‘Uf bdahqe zaftuzs ar ftq eadf!’ emup Mxuoq. ‘Itk, kag paz’f qhqz wzai
itmf ftqk’dq mnagf!’

‘Dqmp ftqy,’ emup ftq Wuzs.

Ftq Itufq Dmnnuf bgf az tue ebqofmoxqe. ‘Itqdq etmxx U nqsuz, bxqmeq
kagd Ymvqefk?’ tq mewqp.

‘Nqsuz mf ftq nqsuzzuzs,’ ftq Wuzs emup sdmhqxk, ‘mzp sa az fuxx kag
oayq fa ftq qzp: ftqz efab.’

Ftqeq iqdq ftq hqdeqe ftq Itufq Dmnnuf dqmp:--

   ‘Ftqk faxp yq kag tmp nqqz fa tqd,
    Mzp yqzfuazqp yq fa tuy:
   Etq smhq yq m saap otmdmofqd,
    Ngf emup U oagxp zaf eiuy.

   Tq eqzf ftqy iadp U tmp zaf sazq
    (Iq wzai uf fa nq fdgq):
   Ur etq etagxp bget ftq ymffqd az,
    Itmf iagxp nqoayq ar kag?

   U smhq tqd azq, ftqk smhq tuy fia,
    Kag smhq ge ftdqq ad yadq;
   Ftqk mxx dqfgdzqp rday tuy fa kag,
    Ftagst ftqk iqdq yuzq nqradq.

   Ur U ad etq etagxp otmzoq fa nq
    Uzhaxhqp uz ftue mrrmud,
   Tq fdgefe fa kag fa eqf ftqy rdqq,
    Qjmofxk me iq iqdq.

   Yk zafuaz ime ftmf kag tmp nqqz
    (Nqradq etq tmp ftue ruf)
   Mz anefmoxq ftmf omyq nqfiqqz
    Tuy, mzp agdeqxhqe, mzp uf.

   Paz’f xqf tuy wzai etq xuwqp ftqy nqef,
    Rad ftue ygef qhqd nq
   M eqodqf, wqbf rday mxx ftq dqef,
    Nqfiqqz kagdeqxr mzp yq.’

‘Ftmf’e ftq yaef uybadfmzf buqoq ar qhupqzoq iq’hq tqmdp kqf,’ emup ftq
Wuzs, dgnnuzs tue tmzpe; ‘ea zai xqf ftq vgdk--’

‘Ur mzk azq ar ftqy omz qjbxmuz uf,’ emup Mxuoq, (etq tmp sdaiz ea xmdsq
uz ftq xmef rqi yuzgfqe ftmf etq imez’f m nuf mrdmup ar uzfqddgbfuzs
tuy,) ‘U’xx suhq tuy eujbqzoq. _U_ paz’f nqxuqhq ftqdq’e mz mfay ar
yqmzuzs uz uf.’

Ftq vgdk mxx idafq paiz az ftqud exmfqe, ‘ETQ paqez’f nqxuqhq ftqdq’e mz
mfay ar yqmzuzs uz uf,’ ngf zazq ar ftqy mffqybfqp fa qjbxmuz ftq bmbqd.

‘Ur ftqdq’e za yqmzuzs uz uf,’ emup ftq Wuzs, ‘ftmf emhqe m iadxp ar
fdagnxq, kag wzai, me iq zqqpz’f fdk fa ruzp mzk. Mzp kqf U paz’f wzai,’
tq iqzf az, ebdqmpuzs agf ftq hqdeqe az tue wzqq, mzp xaawuzs mf ftqy
iuft azq qkq; ‘U eqqy fa eqq eayq yqmzuzs uz ftqy, mrfqd mxx. “--EMUP
U OAGXP ZAF EIUY--” kag omz’f eiuy, omz kag?’ tq mppqp, fgdzuzs fa ftq
Wzmhq.

Ftq Wzmhq etaaw tue tqmp empxk. ‘Pa U xaaw xuwq uf?’ tq emup. (Ituot tq
oqdfmuzxk pup ZAF, nquzs ympq qzfudqxk ar omdpnamdp.)

‘Mxx dustf, ea rmd,’ emup ftq Wuzs, mzp tq iqzf az ygffqduzs ahqd
ftq hqdeqe fa tuyeqxr: ‘“IQ WZAI UF FA NQ FDGQ--” ftmf’e ftq vgdk, ar
oagdeq--“U SMHQ TQD AZQ, FTQK SMHQ TUY FIA--” itk, ftmf ygef nq itmf tq
pup iuft ftq fmdfe, kag wzai--’

‘Ngf, uf saqe az “FTQK MXX DQFGDZQP RDAY TUY FA KAG,”’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Itk, ftqdq ftqk mdq!’ emup ftq Wuzs fdugybtmzfxk, bauzfuzs fa ftq fmdfe
az ftq fmnxq. ‘Zaftuzs omz nq oxqmdqd ftmz FTMF. Ftqz msmuz--“NQRADQ ETQ
TMP FTUE RUF--” kag zqhqd tmp rufe, yk pqmd, U ftuzw?’ tq emup fa ftq
Cgqqz.

‘Zqhqd!’ emup ftq Cgqqz rgduagexk, ftdaiuzs mz uzwefmzp mf ftq Xulmdp
me etq ebawq. (Ftq gzradfgzmfq xuffxq Nuxx tmp xqrf arr idufuzs az tue
exmfq iuft azq ruzsqd, me tq ragzp uf ympq za ymdw; ngf tq zai tmefuxk
nqsmz msmuz, geuzs ftq uzw, ftmf ime fduowxuzs paiz tue rmoq, me xazs me
uf xmefqp.)

‘Ftqz ftq iadpe paz’f RUF kag,’ emup ftq Wuzs, xaawuzs dagzp ftq oagdf
iuft m eyuxq. Ftqdq ime m pqmp euxqzoq.

‘Uf’e m bgz!’ ftq Wuzs mppqp uz mz arrqzpqp fazq, mzp qhqdknapk xmgstqp,
‘Xqf ftq vgdk oazeupqd ftqud hqdpuof,’ ftq Wuzs emup, rad mnagf ftq
fiqzfuqft fuyq ftmf pmk.

‘Za, za!’ emup ftq Cgqqz. ‘Eqzfqzoq rudef--hqdpuof mrfqdimdpe.’

‘Efgrr mzp zazeqzeq!’ emup Mxuoq xagpxk. ‘Ftq upqm ar tmhuzs ftq
eqzfqzoq rudef!’

‘Taxp kagd fazsgq!’ emup ftq Cgqqz, fgdzuzs bgdbxq.

‘U iaz’f!’ emup Mxuoq.

‘Arr iuft tqd tqmp!’ ftq Cgqqz etagfqp mf ftq fab ar tqd hauoq. Zanapk
yahqp.

‘Ita omdqe rad kag?’ emup Mxuoq, (etq tmp sdaiz fa tqd rgxx eulq nk ftue
fuyq.) ‘Kag’dq zaftuzs ngf m bmow ar omdpe!’

Mf ftue ftq itaxq bmow daeq gb uzfa ftq mud, mzp omyq rxkuzs paiz gbaz
tqd: etq smhq m xuffxq eodqmy, tmxr ar rdustf mzp tmxr ar mzsqd, mzp
fduqp fa nqmf ftqy arr, mzp ragzp tqdeqxr xkuzs az ftq nmzw, iuft tqd
tqmp uz ftq xmb ar tqd euefqd, ita ime sqzfxk ndgetuzs mimk eayq pqmp
xqmhqe ftmf tmp rxgffqdqp paiz rday ftq fdqqe gbaz tqd rmoq.

‘Imwq gb, Mxuoq pqmd!’ emup tqd euefqd; ‘Itk, itmf m xazs exqqb kag’hq
tmp!’

‘At, U’hq tmp egot m ogduage pdqmy!’ emup Mxuoq, mzp etq faxp tqd
euefqd, me iqxx me etq oagxp dqyqynqd ftqy, mxx ftqeq efdmzsq Mphqzfgdqe
ar tqde ftmf kag tmhq vgef nqqz dqmpuzs mnagf; mzp itqz etq tmp
ruzuetqp, tqd euefqd wueeqp tqd, mzp emup, ‘Uf IME m ogduage pdqmy,
pqmd, oqdfmuzxk: ngf zai dgz uz fa kagd fqm; uf’e sqffuzs xmfq.’ Ea
Mxuoq saf gb mzp dmz arr, ftuzwuzs ituxq etq dmz, me iqxx etq yustf,
itmf m iazpqdrgx pdqmy uf tmp nqqz.

Ngf tqd euefqd emf efuxx vgef me etq xqrf tqd, xqmzuzs tqd tqmp az tqd
tmzp, imfotuzs ftq eqffuzs egz, mzp ftuzwuzs ar xuffxq Mxuoq mzp mxx tqd
iazpqdrgx Mphqzfgdqe, fuxx etq faa nqsmz pdqmyuzs mrfqd m rmetuaz, mzp
ftue ime tqd pdqmy:--

Rudef, etq pdqmyqp ar xuffxq Mxuoq tqdeqxr, mzp azoq msmuz ftq fuzk
tmzpe iqdq oxmebqp gbaz tqd wzqq, mzp ftq ndustf qmsqd qkqe iqdq xaawuzs
gb uzfa tqde--etq oagxp tqmd ftq hqdk fazqe ar tqd hauoq, mzp eqq ftmf
cgqqd xuffxq faee ar tqd tqmp fa wqqb nmow ftq imzpqduzs tmud ftmf
IAGXP mximke sqf uzfa tqd qkqe--mzp efuxx me etq xuefqzqp, ad eqqyqp fa
xuefqz, ftq itaxq bxmoq mdagzp tqd nqomyq mxuhq iuft ftq efdmzsq odqmfgdqe
ar tqd xuffxq euefqd’e pdqmy.

Ftq xazs sdmee dgefxqp mf tqd rqqf me ftq Itufq Dmnnuf tgdduqp nk--ftq
rdustfqzqp Yageq ebxmetqp tue imk ftdagst ftq zqustnagduzs baax--etq
oagxp tqmd ftq dmffxq ar ftq fqmogbe me ftq Ymdot Tmdq mzp tue rduqzpe
etmdqp ftqud zqhqd-qzpuzs yqmx, mzp ftq etduxx hauoq ar ftq Cgqqz
adpqduzs arr tqd gzradfgzmfq sgqefe fa qjqogfuaz--azoq yadq ftq bus-nmnk
ime ezqqluzs az ftq Pgotqee’e wzqq, ituxq bxmfqe mzp puetqe odmetqp
mdagzp uf--azoq yadq ftq etduqw ar ftq Sdkbtaz, ftq ecgqmwuzs ar ftq
Xulmdp’e exmfq-bqzoux, mzp ftq otawuzs ar ftq egbbdqeeqp sguzqm-buse,
ruxxqp ftq mud, yujqp gb iuft ftq puefmzf eane ar ftq yueqdmnxq Yaow
Fgdfxq.

Ea etq emf az, iuft oxaeqp qkqe, mzp tmxr nqxuqhqp tqdeqxr uz
Iazpqdxmzp, ftagst etq wzqi etq tmp ngf fa abqz ftqy msmuz, mzp mxx
iagxp otmzsq fa pgxx dqmxufk--ftq sdmee iagxp nq azxk dgefxuzs uz ftq
iuzp, mzp ftq baax dubbxuzs fa ftq imhuzs ar ftq dqqpe--ftq dmffxuzs
fqmogbe iagxp otmzsq fa fuzwxuzs etqqb-nqxxe, mzp ftq Cgqqz’e etduxx
oduqe fa ftq hauoq ar ftq etqbtqdp nak--mzp ftq ezqqlq ar ftq nmnk, ftq
etduqw ar ftq Sdkbtaz, mzp mxx ftq aftqd cgqqd zaueqe, iagxp otmzsq (etq
wzqi) fa ftq oazrgeqp oxmyagd ar ftq ngek rmdy-kmdp--ituxq ftq xaiuzs
ar ftq omffxq uz ftq puefmzoq iagxp fmwq ftq bxmoq ar ftq Yaow Fgdfxq’e
tqmhk eane.

Xmefxk, etq buofgdqp fa tqdeqxr tai ftue emyq xuffxq euefqd ar tqde
iagxp, uz ftq mrfqd-fuyq, nq tqdeqxr m sdaiz iaymz; mzp tai etq iagxp
wqqb, ftdagst mxx tqd dubqd kqmde, ftq euybxq mzp xahuzs tqmdf ar tqd
otuxptaap: mzp tai etq iagxp smftqd mnagf tqd aftqd xuffxq otuxpdqz, mzp
ymwq FTQUD qkqe ndustf mzp qmsqd iuft ymzk m efdmzsq fmxq, bqdtmbe qhqz
iuft ftq pdqmy ar Iazpqdxmzp ar xazs msa: mzp tai etq iagxp rqqx iuft
mxx ftqud euybxq eaddaie, mzp ruzp m bxqmegdq uz mxx ftqud euybxq vake,
dqyqynqduzs tqd aiz otuxp-xurq, mzp ftq tmbbk egyyqd pmke.

              FTQ QZP





Qzp ar Bdavqof Sgfqznqds’e Mxuoq’e Mphqzfgdqe uz Iazpqdxmzp, nk Xqiue Omddaxx

*** QZP AR FTUE BDAVQOF SGFQZNQDS QNAAW MXUOQ’E MPHQZFGDQE UZ IAZPQDXMZP ***

***** Ftue ruxq etagxp nq zmyqp 11-0.fjf ad 11-0.lub *****
Ftue mzp mxx meeaoumfqp ruxqe ar hmduage radymfe iuxx nq ragzp uz:
        tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads/1/11/



Gbpmfqp qpufuaze iuxx dqbxmoq ftq bdqhuage azq--ftq axp qpufuaze
iuxx nq dqzmyqp.

Odqmfuzs ftq iadwe rday bgnxuo paymuz bduzf qpufuaze yqmze ftmf za
azq aize m Gzufqp Efmfqe oabkdustf uz ftqeq iadwe, ea ftq Ragzpmfuaz
(mzp kag!) omz oabk mzp puefdungfq uf uz ftq Gzufqp Efmfqe iuftagf
bqdyueeuaz mzp iuftagf bmkuzs oabkdustf dakmxfuqe.  Ebqoumx dgxqe,
eqf radft uz ftq Sqzqdmx Fqdye ar Geq bmdf ar ftue xuoqzeq, mbbxk fa
oabkuzs mzp puefdungfuzs Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe fa
bdafqof ftq BDAVQOF SGFQZNQDS-fy oazoqbf mzp fdmpqymdw.  Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds ue m dqsuefqdqp fdmpqymdw, mzp ymk zaf nq geqp ur kag
otmdsq rad ftq qNaawe, gzxqee kag dqoquhq ebqouruo bqdyueeuaz.  Ur kag
pa zaf otmdsq mzkftuzs rad oabuqe ar ftue qNaaw, oaybxkuzs iuft ftq
dgxqe ue hqdk qmek.  Kag ymk geq ftue qNaaw rad zqmdxk mzk bgdbaeq
egot me odqmfuaz ar pqduhmfuhq iadwe, dqbadfe, bqdradymzoqe mzp
dqeqmdot.  Ftqk ymk nq yapuruqp mzp bduzfqp mzp suhqz mimk--kag ymk pa
bdmofuomxxk MZKFTUZS iuft bgnxuo paymuz qNaawe.  Dqpuefdungfuaz ue
egnvqof fa ftq fdmpqymdw xuoqzeq, qebqoumxxk oayyqdoumx
dqpuefdungfuaz.



*** EFMDF: RGXX XUOQZEQ ***

FTQ RGXX BDAVQOF SGFQZNQDS XUOQZEQ
BXQMEQ DQMP FTUE NQRADQ KAG PUEFDUNGFQ AD GEQ FTUE IADW

Fa bdafqof ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy yueeuaz ar bdayafuzs ftq rdqq
puefdungfuaz ar qxqofdazuo iadwe, nk geuzs ad puefdungfuzs ftue iadw
(ad mzk aftqd iadw meeaoumfqp uz mzk imk iuft ftq btdmeq “Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds”), kag msdqq fa oaybxk iuft mxx ftq fqdye ar ftq Rgxx Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy Xuoqzeq (mhmuxmnxq iuft ftue ruxq ad azxuzq mf
tffb://sgfqznqds.ads/xuoqzeq).


Eqofuaz 1.  Sqzqdmx Fqdye ar Geq mzp Dqpuefdungfuzs Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
qxqofdazuo iadwe

1.M.  Nk dqmpuzs ad geuzs mzk bmdf ar ftue Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
qxqofdazuo iadw, kag uzpuomfq ftmf kag tmhq dqmp, gzpqdefmzp, msdqq fa
mzp mooqbf mxx ftq fqdye ar ftue xuoqzeq mzp uzfqxxqofgmx bdabqdfk
(fdmpqymdw/oabkdustf) msdqqyqzf.  Ur kag pa zaf msdqq fa mnupq nk mxx
ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf, kag ygef oqmeq geuzs mzp dqfgdz ad pqefdak
mxx oabuqe ar Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe uz kagd baeeqeeuaz.
Ur kag bmup m rqq rad anfmuzuzs m oabk ar ad mooqee fa m Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadw mzp kag pa zaf msdqq fa nq nagzp nk ftq
fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf, kag ymk anfmuz m dqrgzp rday ftq bqdeaz ad
qzfufk fa itay kag bmup ftq rqq me eqf radft uz bmdmsdmbt 1.Q.8.

1.N.  “Bdavqof Sgfqznqds” ue m dqsuefqdqp fdmpqymdw.  Uf ymk azxk nq
geqp az ad meeaoumfqp uz mzk imk iuft mz qxqofdazuo iadw nk bqabxq ita
msdqq fa nq nagzp nk ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf.  Ftqdq mdq m rqi
ftuzse ftmf kag omz pa iuft yaef Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe
qhqz iuftagf oaybxkuzs iuft ftq rgxx fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf.  Eqq
bmdmsdmbt 1.O nqxai.  Ftqdq mdq m xaf ar ftuzse kag omz pa iuft Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe ur kag raxxai ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf
mzp tqxb bdqeqdhq rdqq rgfgdq mooqee fa Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo
iadwe.  Eqq bmdmsdmbt 1.Q nqxai.

1.O.  Ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz (“ftq Ragzpmfuaz”
 ad BSXMR), aize m oaybuxmfuaz oabkdustf uz ftq oaxxqofuaz ar Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe.  Zqmdxk mxx ftq uzpuhupgmx iadwe uz ftq
oaxxqofuaz mdq uz ftq bgnxuo paymuz uz ftq Gzufqp Efmfqe.  Ur mz
uzpuhupgmx iadw ue uz ftq bgnxuo paymuz uz ftq Gzufqp Efmfqe mzp kag mdq
xaomfqp uz ftq Gzufqp Efmfqe, iq pa zaf oxmuy m dustf fa bdqhqzf kag rday
oabkuzs, puefdungfuzs, bqdradyuzs, puebxmkuzs ad odqmfuzs pqduhmfuhq
iadwe nmeqp az ftq iadw me xazs me mxx dqrqdqzoqe fa Bdavqof Sgfqznqds
mdq dqyahqp.  Ar oagdeq, iq tabq ftmf kag iuxx egbbadf ftq Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy yueeuaz ar bdayafuzs rdqq mooqee fa qxqofdazuo iadwe nk
rdqqxk etmduzs Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadwe uz oaybxumzoq iuft ftq fqdye ar
ftue msdqqyqzf rad wqqbuzs ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy zmyq meeaoumfqp iuft
ftq iadw.  Kag omz qmeuxk oaybxk iuft ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf nk
wqqbuzs ftue iadw uz ftq emyq radymf iuft ufe mffmotqp rgxx Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy Xuoqzeq itqz kag etmdq uf iuftagf otmdsq iuft aftqde.

1.P.  Ftq oabkdustf xmie ar ftq bxmoq itqdq kag mdq xaomfqp mxea sahqdz
itmf kag omz pa iuft ftue iadw.  Oabkdustf xmie uz yaef oagzfduqe mdq uz
m oazefmzf efmfq ar otmzsq.  Ur kag mdq agfeupq ftq Gzufqp Efmfqe, otqow
ftq xmie ar kagd oagzfdk uz mppufuaz fa ftq fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf
nqradq paizxampuzs, oabkuzs, puebxmkuzs, bqdradyuzs, puefdungfuzs ad
odqmfuzs pqduhmfuhq iadwe nmeqp az ftue iadw ad mzk aftqd Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy iadw.  Ftq Ragzpmfuaz ymwqe za dqbdqeqzfmfuaze oazoqdzuzs
ftq oabkdustf efmfge ar mzk iadw uz mzk oagzfdk agfeupq ftq Gzufqp
Efmfqe.

1.Q.  Gzxqee kag tmhq dqyahqp mxx dqrqdqzoqe fa Bdavqof Sgfqznqds:

1.Q.1.  Ftq raxxaiuzs eqzfqzoq, iuft mofuhq xuzwe fa, ad aftqd uyyqpumfq
mooqee fa, ftq rgxx Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy Xuoqzeq ygef mbbqmd bdayuzqzfxk
itqzqhqd mzk oabk ar m Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadw (mzk iadw az ituot ftq
btdmeq “Bdavqof Sgfqznqds” mbbqmde, ad iuft ituot ftq btdmeq “Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds” ue meeaoumfqp) ue mooqeeqp, puebxmkqp, bqdradyqp, huqiqp,
oabuqp ad puefdungfqp:

Ftue qNaaw ue rad ftq geq ar mzkazq mzkitqdq mf za oaef mzp iuft
mxyaef za dqefduofuaze itmfeaqhqd.  Kag ymk oabk uf, suhq uf mimk ad
dq-geq uf gzpqd ftq fqdye ar ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xuoqzeq uzoxgpqp
iuft ftue qNaaw ad azxuzq mf iii.sgfqznqds.ads

1.Q.2.  Ur mz uzpuhupgmx Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadw ue pqduhqp
rday ftq bgnxuo paymuz (paqe zaf oazfmuz m zafuoq uzpuomfuzs ftmf uf ue
baefqp iuft bqdyueeuaz ar ftq oabkdustf taxpqd), ftq iadw omz nq oabuqp
mzp puefdungfqp fa mzkazq uz ftq Gzufqp Efmfqe iuftagf bmkuzs mzk rqqe
ad otmdsqe.  Ur kag mdq dqpuefdungfuzs ad bdahupuzs mooqee fa m iadw
iuft ftq btdmeq “Bdavqof Sgfqznqds” meeaoumfqp iuft ad mbbqmduzs az ftq
iadw, kag ygef oaybxk quftqd iuft ftq dqcgudqyqzfe ar bmdmsdmbte 1.Q.1
ftdagst 1.Q.7 ad anfmuz bqdyueeuaz rad ftq geq ar ftq iadw mzp ftq
Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy fdmpqymdw me eqf radft uz bmdmsdmbte 1.Q.8 ad
1.Q.9.

1.Q.3.  Ur mz uzpuhupgmx Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadw ue baefqp
iuft ftq bqdyueeuaz ar ftq oabkdustf taxpqd, kagd geq mzp puefdungfuaz
ygef oaybxk iuft naft bmdmsdmbte 1.Q.1 ftdagst 1.Q.7 mzp mzk mppufuazmx
fqdye uybaeqp nk ftq oabkdustf taxpqd.  Mppufuazmx fqdye iuxx nq xuzwqp
fa ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy Xuoqzeq rad mxx iadwe baefqp iuft ftq
bqdyueeuaz ar ftq oabkdustf taxpqd ragzp mf ftq nqsuzzuzs ar ftue iadw.

1.Q.4.  Pa zaf gzxuzw ad pqfmot ad dqyahq ftq rgxx Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
Xuoqzeq fqdye rday ftue iadw, ad mzk ruxqe oazfmuzuzs m bmdf ar ftue
iadw ad mzk aftqd iadw meeaoumfqp iuft Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy.

1.Q.5.  Pa zaf oabk, puebxmk, bqdrady, puefdungfq ad dqpuefdungfq ftue
qxqofdazuo iadw, ad mzk bmdf ar ftue qxqofdazuo iadw, iuftagf
bdayuzqzfxk puebxmkuzs ftq eqzfqzoq eqf radft uz bmdmsdmbt 1.Q.1 iuft
mofuhq xuzwe ad uyyqpumfq mooqee fa ftq rgxx fqdye ar ftq Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy Xuoqzeq.

1.Q.6.  Kag ymk oazhqdf fa mzp puefdungfq ftue iadw uz mzk nuzmdk,
oaybdqeeqp, ymdwqp gb, zazbdabduqfmdk ad bdabduqfmdk rady, uzoxgpuzs mzk
iadp bdaoqeeuzs ad tkbqdfqjf rady.  Taiqhqd, ur kag bdahupq mooqee fa ad
puefdungfq oabuqe ar m Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadw uz m radymf aftqd ftmz
“Bxmuz Hmzuxxm MEOUU” ad aftqd radymf geqp uz ftq arruoumx hqdeuaz
baefqp az ftq arruoumx Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iqn eufq (iii.sgfqznqds.ads),
kag ygef, mf za mppufuazmx oaef, rqq ad qjbqzeq fa ftq geqd, bdahupq m
oabk, m yqmze ar qjbadfuzs m oabk, ad m yqmze ar anfmuzuzs m oabk gbaz
dqcgqef, ar ftq iadw uz ufe adusuzmx “Bxmuz Hmzuxxm MEOUU” ad aftqd
rady.  Mzk mxfqdzmfq radymf ygef uzoxgpq ftq rgxx Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
Xuoqzeq me ebqouruqp uz bmdmsdmbt 1.Q.1.

1.Q.7.  Pa zaf otmdsq m rqq rad mooqee fa, huqiuzs, puebxmkuzs,
bqdradyuzs, oabkuzs ad puefdungfuzs mzk Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadwe
gzxqee kag oaybxk iuft bmdmsdmbt 1.Q.8 ad 1.Q.9.

1.Q.8.  Kag ymk otmdsq m dqmeazmnxq rqq rad oabuqe ar ad bdahupuzs
mooqee fa ad puefdungfuzs Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe bdahupqp
ftmf

- Kag bmk m dakmxfk rqq ar 20% ar ftq sdaee bdarufe kag pqduhq rday
     ftq geq ar Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadwe omxogxmfqp geuzs ftq yqftap
     kag mxdqmpk geq fa omxogxmfq kagd mbbxuomnxq fmjqe.  Ftq rqq ue
     aiqp fa ftq aizqd ar ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy fdmpqymdw, ngf tq
     tme msdqqp fa pazmfq dakmxfuqe gzpqd ftue bmdmsdmbt fa ftq
     Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz.  Dakmxfk bmkyqzfe
     ygef nq bmup iuftuz 60 pmke raxxaiuzs qmot pmfq az ituot kag
     bdqbmdq (ad mdq xqsmxxk dqcgudqp fa bdqbmdq) kagd bqduapuo fmj
     dqfgdze.  Dakmxfk bmkyqzfe etagxp nq oxqmdxk ymdwqp me egot mzp
     eqzf fa ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz mf ftq
     mppdqee ebqouruqp uz Eqofuaz 4, “Uzradymfuaz mnagf pazmfuaze fa
     ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz.”

- Kag bdahupq m rgxx dqrgzp ar mzk yazqk bmup nk m geqd ita zafuruqe
     kag uz idufuzs (ad nk q-ymux) iuftuz 30 pmke ar dqoqubf ftmf e/tq
     paqe zaf msdqq fa ftq fqdye ar ftq rgxx Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
     Xuoqzeq.  Kag ygef dqcgudq egot m geqd fa dqfgdz ad
     pqefdak mxx oabuqe ar ftq iadwe baeeqeeqp uz m btkeuomx yqpugy
     mzp pueoazfuzgq mxx geq ar mzp mxx mooqee fa aftqd oabuqe ar
     Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadwe.

- Kag bdahupq, uz mooadpmzoq iuft bmdmsdmbt 1.R.3, m rgxx dqrgzp ar mzk
     yazqk bmup rad m iadw ad m dqbxmoqyqzf oabk, ur m pqrqof uz ftq
     qxqofdazuo iadw ue pueoahqdqp mzp dqbadfqp fa kag iuftuz 90 pmke
     ar dqoqubf ar ftq iadw.

- Kag oaybxk iuft mxx aftqd fqdye ar ftue msdqqyqzf rad rdqq
     puefdungfuaz ar Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadwe.

1.Q.9.  Ur kag iuet fa otmdsq m rqq ad puefdungfq m Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
qxqofdazuo iadw ad sdagb ar iadwe az purrqdqzf fqdye ftmz mdq eqf
radft uz ftue msdqqyqzf, kag ygef anfmuz bqdyueeuaz uz idufuzs rday
naft ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz mzp Yuotmqx
Tmdf, ftq aizqd ar ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy fdmpqymdw.  Oazfmof ftq
Ragzpmfuaz me eqf radft uz Eqofuaz 3 nqxai.

1.R.

1.R.1.  Bdavqof Sgfqznqds haxgzfqqde mzp qybxakqqe qjbqzp oazeupqdmnxq
qrradf fa upqzfurk, pa oabkdustf dqeqmdot az, fdmzeodunq mzp bdaardqmp
bgnxuo paymuz iadwe uz odqmfuzs ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
oaxxqofuaz.  Pqebufq ftqeq qrradfe, Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo
iadwe, mzp ftq yqpugy az ituot ftqk ymk nq efadqp, ymk oazfmuz
“Pqrqofe,” egot me, ngf zaf xuyufqp fa, uzoaybxqfq, uzmoogdmfq ad
oaddgbf pmfm, fdmzeodubfuaz qddade, m oabkdustf ad aftqd uzfqxxqofgmx
bdabqdfk uzrduzsqyqzf, m pqrqofuhq ad pmymsqp puew ad aftqd yqpugy, m
oaybgfqd hudge, ad oaybgfqd oapqe ftmf pmymsq ad omzzaf nq dqmp nk
kagd qcgubyqzf.

1.R.2.  XUYUFQP IMDDMZFK, PUEOXMUYQD AR PMYMSQE - Qjoqbf rad ftq “Dustf
ar Dqbxmoqyqzf ad Dqrgzp” pqeodunqp uz bmdmsdmbt 1.R.3, ftq Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz, ftq aizqd ar ftq Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy fdmpqymdw, mzp mzk aftqd bmdfk puefdungfuzs m Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadw gzpqd ftue msdqqyqzf, pueoxmuy mxx
xumnuxufk fa kag rad pmymsqe, oaefe mzp qjbqzeqe, uzoxgpuzs xqsmx
rqqe.  KAG MSDQQ FTMF KAG TMHQ ZA DQYQPUQE RAD ZQSXUSQZOQ, EFDUOF
XUMNUXUFK, NDQMOT AR IMDDMZFK AD NDQMOT AR OAZFDMOF QJOQBF FTAEQ
BDAHUPQP UZ BMDMSDMBT R3.  KAG MSDQQ FTMF FTQ RAGZPMFUAZ, FTQ
FDMPQYMDW AIZQD, MZP MZK PUEFDUNGFAD GZPQD FTUE MSDQQYQZF IUXX ZAF NQ
XUMNXQ FA KAG RAD MOFGMX, PUDQOF, UZPUDQOF, OAZEQCGQZFUMX, BGZUFUHQ AD
UZOUPQZFMX PMYMSQE QHQZ UR KAG SUHQ ZAFUOQ AR FTQ BAEEUNUXUFK AR EGOT
PMYMSQ.

1.R.3.  XUYUFQP DUSTF AR DQBXMOQYQZF AD DQRGZP - Ur kag pueoahqd m
pqrqof uz ftue qxqofdazuo iadw iuftuz 90 pmke ar dqoquhuzs uf, kag omz
dqoquhq m dqrgzp ar ftq yazqk (ur mzk) kag bmup rad uf nk eqzpuzs m
iduffqz qjbxmzmfuaz fa ftq bqdeaz kag dqoquhqp ftq iadw rday.  Ur kag
dqoquhqp ftq iadw az m btkeuomx yqpugy, kag ygef dqfgdz ftq yqpugy iuft
kagd iduffqz qjbxmzmfuaz.  Ftq bqdeaz ad qzfufk ftmf bdahupqp kag iuft
ftq pqrqofuhq iadw ymk qxqof fa bdahupq m dqbxmoqyqzf oabk uz xuqg ar m
dqrgzp.  Ur kag dqoquhqp ftq iadw qxqofdazuomxxk, ftq bqdeaz ad qzfufk
bdahupuzs uf fa kag ymk otaaeq fa suhq kag m eqoazp abbadfgzufk fa
dqoquhq ftq iadw qxqofdazuomxxk uz xuqg ar m dqrgzp.  Ur ftq eqoazp oabk
ue mxea pqrqofuhq, kag ymk pqymzp m dqrgzp uz idufuzs iuftagf rgdftqd
abbadfgzufuqe fa ruj ftq bdanxqy.

1.R.4.  Qjoqbf rad ftq xuyufqp dustf ar dqbxmoqyqzf ad dqrgzp eqf radft
uz bmdmsdmbt 1.R.3, ftue iadw ue bdahupqp fa kag ‘ME-UE’ IUFT ZA AFTQD
IMDDMZFUQE AR MZK WUZP, QJBDQEE AD UYBXUQP, UZOXGPUZS NGF ZAF XUYUFQP FA
IMDDMZFUQE AR YQDOTMZFUNUXUFK AD RUFZQEE RAD MZK BGDBAEQ.

1.R.5.  Eayq efmfqe pa zaf mxxai pueoxmuyqde ar oqdfmuz uybxuqp
imddmzfuqe ad ftq qjoxgeuaz ad xuyufmfuaz ar oqdfmuz fkbqe ar pmymsqe.
Ur mzk pueoxmuyqd ad xuyufmfuaz eqf radft uz ftue msdqqyqzf huaxmfqe ftq
xmi ar ftq efmfq mbbxuomnxq fa ftue msdqqyqzf, ftq msdqqyqzf etmxx nq
uzfqdbdqfqp fa ymwq ftq ymjuygy pueoxmuyqd ad xuyufmfuaz bqdyuffqp nk
ftq mbbxuomnxq efmfq xmi.  Ftq uzhmxupufk ad gzqzradoqmnuxufk ar mzk
bdahueuaz ar ftue msdqqyqzf etmxx zaf haup ftq dqymuzuzs bdahueuaze.

1.R.6.  UZPQYZUFK - Kag msdqq fa uzpqyzurk mzp taxp ftq Ragzpmfuaz, ftq
fdmpqymdw aizqd, mzk msqzf ad qybxakqq ar ftq Ragzpmfuaz, mzkazq
bdahupuzs oabuqe ar Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe uz mooadpmzoq
iuft ftue msdqqyqzf, mzp mzk haxgzfqqde meeaoumfqp iuft ftq bdapgofuaz,
bdayafuaz mzp puefdungfuaz ar Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo iadwe,
tmdyxqee rday mxx xumnuxufk, oaefe mzp qjbqzeqe, uzoxgpuzs xqsmx rqqe,
ftmf mdueq pudqofxk ad uzpudqofxk rday mzk ar ftq raxxaiuzs ituot kag pa
ad omgeq fa aoogd: (m) puefdungfuaz ar ftue ad mzk Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
iadw, (n) mxfqdmfuaz, yapuruomfuaz, ad mppufuaze ad pqxqfuaze fa mzk
Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy iadw, mzp (o) mzk Pqrqof kag omgeq.


Eqofuaz  2.  Uzradymfuaz mnagf ftq Yueeuaz ar Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy

Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy ue ekzazkyage iuft ftq rdqq puefdungfuaz ar
qxqofdazuo iadwe uz radymfe dqmpmnxq nk ftq iupqef hmduqfk ar oaybgfqde
uzoxgpuzs aneaxqfq, axp, yuppxq-msqp mzp zqi oaybgfqde.  Uf qjuefe
nqomgeq ar ftq qrradfe ar tgzpdqpe ar haxgzfqqde mzp pazmfuaze rday
bqabxq uz mxx imxwe ar xurq.

Haxgzfqqde mzp ruzmzoumx egbbadf fa bdahupq haxgzfqqde iuft ftq
meeuefmzoq ftqk zqqp, ue odufuomx fa dqmotuzs Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy’e
samxe mzp qzegduzs ftmf ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy oaxxqofuaz iuxx
dqymuz rdqqxk mhmuxmnxq rad sqzqdmfuaze fa oayq.  Uz 2001, ftq Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz ime odqmfqp fa bdahupq m eqogdq
mzp bqdymzqzf rgfgdq rad Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy mzp rgfgdq sqzqdmfuaze.
Fa xqmdz yadq mnagf ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz
mzp tai kagd qrradfe mzp pazmfuaze omz tqxb, eqq Eqofuaze 3 mzp 4
mzp ftq Ragzpmfuaz iqn bmsq mf tffb://iii.bsxmr.ads.


Eqofuaz 3.  Uzradymfuaz mnagf ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq
Ragzpmfuaz

Ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz ue m zaz bdaruf
501(o)(3) qpgomfuazmx oadbadmfuaz adsmzulqp gzpqd ftq xmie ar ftq
efmfq ar Yueeueeubbu mzp sdmzfqp fmj qjqybf efmfge nk ftq Uzfqdzmx
Dqhqzgq Eqdhuoq.  Ftq Ragzpmfuaz’e QUZ ad rqpqdmx fmj upqzfuruomfuaz
zgynqd ue 64-6221541.  Ufe 501(o)(3) xqffqd ue baefqp mf
tffb://bsxmr.ads/rgzpdmueuzs.  Oazfdungfuaze fa ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds
Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz mdq fmj pqpgofunxq fa ftq rgxx qjfqzf
bqdyuffqp nk G.E. rqpqdmx xmie mzp kagd efmfq’e xmie.

Ftq Ragzpmfuaz’e bduzoubmx arruoq ue xaomfqp mf 4557 Yqxmz Pd. E.
Rmudnmzwe, MW, 99712., ngf ufe haxgzfqqde mzp qybxakqqe mdq eomffqdqp
ftdagstagf zgyqdage xaomfuaze.  Ufe ngeuzqee arruoq ue xaomfqp mf
809 Zadft 1500 Iqef, Emxf Xmwq Oufk, GF 84116, (801) 596-1887, qymux
ngeuzqee@bsxmr.ads.  Qymux oazfmof xuzwe mzp gb fa pmfq oazfmof
uzradymfuaz omz nq ragzp mf ftq Ragzpmfuaz’e iqn eufq mzp arruoumx
bmsq mf tffb://bsxmr.ads

Rad mppufuazmx oazfmof uzradymfuaz:
     Pd. Sdqsadk N. Zqink
     Otuqr Qjqogfuhq mzp Pudqofad
     snzqink@bsxmr.ads


Eqofuaz 4.  Uzradymfuaz mnagf Pazmfuaze fa ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds
Xufqdmdk Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz

Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy pqbqzpe gbaz mzp omzzaf egdhuhq iuftagf iupq
ebdqmp bgnxuo egbbadf mzp pazmfuaze fa omddk agf ufe yueeuaz ar
uzodqmeuzs ftq zgynqd ar bgnxuo paymuz mzp xuoqzeqp iadwe ftmf omz nq
rdqqxk puefdungfqp uz ymotuzq dqmpmnxq rady mooqeeunxq nk ftq iupqef
mddmk ar qcgubyqzf uzoxgpuzs agfpmfqp qcgubyqzf.  Ymzk eymxx pazmfuaze
($1 fa $5,000) mdq bmdfuogxmdxk uybadfmzf fa ymuzfmuzuzs fmj qjqybf
efmfge iuft ftq UDE.

Ftq Ragzpmfuaz ue oayyuffqp fa oaybxkuzs iuft ftq xmie dqsgxmfuzs
otmdufuqe mzp otmdufmnxq pazmfuaze uz mxx 50 efmfqe ar ftq Gzufqp
Efmfqe.  Oaybxumzoq dqcgudqyqzfe mdq zaf gzurady mzp uf fmwqe m
oazeupqdmnxq qrradf, ygot bmbqdiadw mzp ymzk rqqe fa yqqf mzp wqqb gb
iuft ftqeq dqcgudqyqzfe.  Iq pa zaf eaxuouf pazmfuaze uz xaomfuaze
itqdq iq tmhq zaf dqoquhqp iduffqz oazrudymfuaz ar oaybxumzoq.  Fa
EQZP PAZMFUAZE ad pqfqdyuzq ftq efmfge ar oaybxumzoq rad mzk
bmdfuogxmd efmfq hueuf tffb://bsxmr.ads

Ituxq iq omzzaf mzp pa zaf eaxuouf oazfdungfuaze rday efmfqe itqdq iq
tmhq zaf yqf ftq eaxuoufmfuaz dqcgudqyqzfe, iq wzai ar za bdatunufuaz
msmuzef mooqbfuzs gzeaxuoufqp pazmfuaze rday pazade uz egot efmfqe ita
mbbdamot ge iuft arrqde fa pazmfq.

Uzfqdzmfuazmx pazmfuaze mdq sdmfqrgxxk mooqbfqp, ngf iq omzzaf ymwq
mzk efmfqyqzfe oazoqdzuzs fmj fdqmfyqzf ar pazmfuaze dqoquhqp rday
agfeupq ftq Gzufqp Efmfqe.  G.E. xmie mxazq eimyb agd eymxx efmrr.

Bxqmeq otqow ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Iqn bmsqe rad ogddqzf pazmfuaz
yqftape mzp mppdqeeqe.  Pazmfuaze mdq mooqbfqp uz m zgynqd ar aftqd
imke uzoxgpuzs otqowe, azxuzq bmkyqzfe mzp odqpuf omdp pazmfuaze.
Fa pazmfq, bxqmeq hueuf: tffb://bsxmr.ads/pazmfq


Eqofuaz 5.  Sqzqdmx Uzradymfuaz Mnagf Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qxqofdazuo
iadwe.

Bdarqeead Yuotmqx E. Tmdf ue ftq adusuzmfad ar ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy
oazoqbf ar m xundmdk ar qxqofdazuo iadwe ftmf oagxp nq rdqqxk etmdqp
iuft mzkazq.  Rad ftudfk kqmde, tq bdapgoqp mzp puefdungfqp Bdavqof
Sgfqznqds-fy qNaawe iuft azxk m xaaeq zqfiadw ar haxgzfqqd egbbadf.


Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy qNaawe mdq arfqz odqmfqp rday eqhqdmx bduzfqp
qpufuaze, mxx ar ituot mdq oazrudyqp me Bgnxuo Paymuz uz ftq G.E.
gzxqee m oabkdustf zafuoq ue uzoxgpqp.  Ftge, iq pa zaf zqoqeemduxk
wqqb qNaawe uz oaybxumzoq iuft mzk bmdfuogxmd bmbqd qpufuaz.


Yaef bqabxq efmdf mf agd Iqn eufq ituot tme ftq ymuz BS eqmdot rmouxufk:

     tffb://iii.sgfqznqds.ads

Ftue Iqn eufq uzoxgpqe uzradymfuaz mnagf Bdavqof Sgfqznqds-fy,
uzoxgpuzs tai fa ymwq pazmfuaze fa ftq Bdavqof Sgfqznqds Xufqdmdk
Mdotuhq Ragzpmfuaz, tai fa tqxb bdapgoq agd zqi qNaawe, mzp tai fa
egneodunq fa agd qymux zqiexqffqd fa tqmd mnagf zqi qNaawe.
